Table of Contents:  Programme rationale : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/TCD/  Programme rationale  Chad remains among the poorest countries in
the world, with  Human Development Index of 392 (185th of 188 countries1) The
dominance of oil in the economy presents medium- to long-term risks if Chad does
not manage the resulting inequalities while diversifying its economy The non-oil
gross domestic product growth is projected at  per cent per year over the medium
to long term, driven by agriculture, commerce, and transportation The informal
agricultural sector, however, continues to be the main source of national
wealth, and Chad has potential in products such as gum arabic, small crops and
leather to offset dependence on the oil sector and increase diversification of
production Poverty is mainly concentrated in rural areas, where 80 percent of
Chadians live There is high youth unemployment and under-employment (22 per cent
and 35 per cent, respectively), and low women’ participation in the formal
economy due to lack of skills and access to finance Women mostly work in the
informal sector, where they earn 61 percent of men’ average incomes While good
policies exist, implementation is incomplete due to weak accountability and
management mechanisms to implement policies, strategies and programmes at all
levels, and to gaps in institutional memory and capacity resulting from frequent
turnover in government  Per capita income more than doubled between the start of
oil production in 2003 and The poverty rate fell from 55 per cent to per cent9
during this period, and access to education improved between 2004 and 2014 (with
an increase in the gross rate of primary school enrolment), as did children’ and
women’ health Between 2005 and 2010 Chad navigated  series of internal conflicts
which weakened the social cohesion among the Chadian people The country has
nevertheless made progress, holding peaceful elections in 2011, 2012 and The
2013 political agreement, the composition of the Independent National Electoral
Commission and the national framework for political dialogue, as well as the
biometric voter registration of over  million voters, are major advances
Nevertheless, Chad faces challenges that, if left unaddressed, will threaten
further progress  To address inequalities, Chad will need concerted attention to
address the marginalization that women encounter in social, political and
economic life10 Women are under-represented in parliament and government
(percent and  percent, respectively) Moreover, 35 per cent of girls are married
before the age of 15; 20 per cent of women are victims of physical violence; and
12 per cent are victims of sexual violence Prevailing customs and low
enforcement of existing laws and gender-sensitive policies, as well as lack of
access to educational, economic, health and other resources, hinder development
progress by preventing the full benefit of economic, political and social
contributions to all Chadians  Governance institutions face low public
confidence The 2015 Mo Ibrahim Index rates Chad as ,11 or 48th, out of 54 sub-
Saharan African countries, with declining socio-economic and human development
the post-conflict context, prevention and management mechanisms for inter- and
intra-community conflicts remain limited While an encouraging political
indicators Considering  UNDP, Human Development Report, 2015  IMF country
report, 2016  Over 50 per cent of gross domestic product since 2010, World Bank
Institute, 2015  per cent versus per cent in urban areas: National Development
Plan (NDP), Chad, report 2013  National development plan, Chad, 2012  Second
general census on population and housing, Institut national de la statistique,
des études économiques et démographiques, 2009  Country policy and institutional
assessment 2013, World Bank  International Monetary Fund survey: Chad Reaps
Benefits of High Oil Prices, Oil-related projects, March 2014  Troisième
enquête sur la consommation des ménages et le secteur informel au Tchad
(ECOSIT3), Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques, juin-
juillet 2011 10 Human Development Report 2015: Gender inequality index 707 in
2015 11 African average is DP/DCP/TCD/ dialogue is ongoing, there is weak
participation of citizens and civil society in oversight and decision- making
The legislature is not playing  sufficiently vital role, proposing only 10 laws
out of 154 from 2001 to 12 Local governance is weak, as only limited power and
resources have been transferred to the decentralized territorial collectivities,
which in turn have little capacity to manage them The leading cause of death in
Chad is malaria, accounting for per cent of consultations at health centres and
adversely affecting people’ productivity and incomes  Poor governance of natural
resources is marked by deforestation,13 over-farming, excessive livestock, and
wildfires, rendering the country vulnerable to natural disasters14 Between 1980
and 2010, over 44 natural disasters struck the country, affecting about  million
people and causing huge economic losses15 While the country has – and depends on
– crude oil reserves, precious metals and stones (gold and diamonds), water,
forests,16 fish and wildlife17 resources, human activity – combined with the
effects of climate change – is threatening the environment Domestic energy is
based mainly on wood, resulting in deforestation, loss of biodiversity and
species extinction The Lake Chad region is the most affected: it has shrunk by
90 per cent between 1960 and 2016,18 with enormous environmental, socio-economic
and security effects Rapid, unplanned urbanization continues in settings where
essential basic and public services cannot keep pace, increasing household
vulnerability  Closely intertwined with the socio-economic, governance and
environmental challenges is the fact that for the past decade Chad has been
experiencing cross-border insecurity heightened by the rise of extremism in the
Sahel-Saharan strip and the Lake Chad region, where Boko Haram attacks are
destroying the Chadian economy, disrupting export of livestock and import of
goods, negatively affecting people’ livelihoods, and exacerbating the socio-
economic inequalities of rural populations and youth Lack of employment
opportunities combined with primary school drop-out rates19 for young girls and
boys make them easy targets for recruitment by terrorist groups The midterm
review of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework recommended that
the United Nations take the youth-employment-radicalization nexus into account
in its next cycle  joint United Nations framework is being developed to
integrate humanitarian needs into development  The previous programmes supported
national development planning, good governance and human security The 2014 mid-
term review of the programme confirmed the strong national positioning of UNDP
given its active participation in the formulation of various national
development strategies Areas such as environment, energy and human development
achieved concrete results, with an improvement in access to microfinance,
including by women An evaluation on biodiversity initiatives found that while
government ownership needs strengthening, the creation of anti-poaching village
surveillance committees and other actions had  positive impact on beneficiaries
and the environment20 The review highlighted UNDP relevance and its capacity to
engage in political dialogue Weaknesses cited included poor project management
practices; weak reporting, monitoring and evaluation; and insufficient
partnership outreach, which is targeted for management improvement  UNDP has
built  solid track record as the focal point for governance among development
partners Its expertise in parliamentary and electoral assistance resulted in its
successfully managing the 2016 electoral process, and the European Union is
willing to pursue this partnership Also significant for social cohesion, the
local peace committees resolved 150 inter- and intra-community conflicts between
Annual report of the Chadian legislature, 2012 The country has lost over 90 per
cent of its forest cover since the 1970s According to the Index For Risk
Management, Chad ranks 9th among countries with the highest risk (of 191 ranked
countries)  million hectares of natural forests Chad country report, preparation
for Rio+20, 2012 UNEP/GRID-Arendal : per cent primary completion rate, national
MDGR, 2015 Evaluation finale du projet Conservation et utilisation durable de la
biodiversité dans le Moyen-Chari, 2015  DP/DCP/TCD/ 2011 and 21 The review
emphasized UNDP capacity development of new local officials in 10 communes,
while highlighting the deeper need of local governments to plan and manage
development resources Following UNDP Global Fund interventions, the malaria
mortality rate fell to 96 per cent between 2004 and 22 UNDP work with the
justice sector to strengthen access to justice and train magistrates and
judicial personnel complements other partners’ interventions, such as those of
the European Union and the United States of America II Programme priorities and
partnerships  In line with the five-year national development plan, the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, 2017–2021, and the humanitarian
response plan, the overarching objective of this programme is to improve
inclusive growth, governance, environmental sustainability, and human capital,
breaking inequalities and strengthening resilience to natural disasters and
protracted humanitarian vulnerabilities The programme is premised on the
understanding that strong, credible governance institutions that manage
development and conflict successfully are the foundation for robust and
inclusive economic progress, and that growth cannot be sustained without
diversification of the economy and appropriate management of natural resources,
including through extractive industries The proposed pathways will support
inclusive political dialogue, participatory governance institutions, and
development planning processes (including equitable, accountable and effective
delivery of anti- malarial services) – particularly at the local level – as well
as inclusive growth, with  focus on access to finance, and value chain-related
job creation, particularly for youth and women As the population is highly
dependent on natural resources, the emphasis will be on ensuring management and
prevention of the largest environmental challenge – drought – and the disasters
that ensue from this vulnerability, as well as protecting the dwindling
biodiversity of the country Since the environment and inclusive growth are
linked to conflict prevention and citizen security, the programme will focus on
building social cohesion and youth employment, participation and anti-
radicalization, particularly in the Lake Chad region The strategy is dependent
on interlinkages between the four pillars of the programme UNDP will engage
national and decentralized institutions in all pillars, albeit in
differentiated manner In inclusive growth, UNDP will build national and local-
level capacities to lead development policy and planning; in governance; UNDP
will work at central and local levels to help legislative, electoral, and local
government institutions better perform core functions for improved
accountability, participation and representation, and to build frameworks and
procedures for dialogue and engagement of civil society in development planning;
in environment, UNDP will work with national and local institutions to
sustainably prepare for and respond to floods and drought; and in human capital,
UNDP will help build the functions and capacities of public administration and
decentralized institutions to deliver improved basic services and respond to
people’ priorities This approach will leverage the trust and knowledge built in
decentralization, local governance, parliamentary development and electoral
assistance during the previous programme, while placing new emphasis on natural
resource management and extractives, civil society, participation in development
planning, and service delivery The focus areas, aligned to the national
development plan, led to several consultations with the Government and partners
during the formulation and validation processes In line with the new United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, the programme approach will better
integrate with the strategic planning of the Government and humanitarian
partners to address fundamental development issues, including many root causes
of vulnerability and humanitarian risks UNDP will assist the Government in the
mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support plan to link the sustainable
development goals agenda, focusing on goals , , , , 10, 15 and 21 Rapport final
du projet Prévention des Conflits par la stabilisation des communautés (2014) 22
National blindness prevention programme, Ministry of Public Health, 2015
DP/DCP/TCD/ Pillar  Inclusive growth and sustainable development To complement
support to development planning and build on lessons and experience from the
previous programme, UNDP will seek to improve livelihoods and achieve structural
transformation of productive capacities that are sustainable and employment-
intensive It will do so through economic diversification and value-chain
development targeting women, youth and small rural producers in selected
regions, using South-South exchanges Partnering with the United Nations Capital
Development Fund, UNDP will scale up the pilot work done on reorganization of
the microfinance sector to promote inclusive finance for greater resilience
Support to producers’ organizations will be through training and financial
grants to promote access to inclusive financing and to new and renewable energy
Greater investment in the multifunctional platforms will strengthen local value
chains UNDP will support women’ empowerment through multifunctional platform
scale-up and access to new and renewable energy and micro-credit loans The
promotion of value chains will focus on transformation, storage, trade, and
export of high-value agricultural, fishery and livestock products UNDP will
support the policy, legal and regulatory framework for the management of
extractive industries and the use of revenue for national and local development
planning UNDP will support evidence-informed national strategies and
partnerships to advance gender equality and women’ empowerment, including the
implementation of the national gender policy and the national strategy to fight
gender-based violence UNDP will support the finalization of the national policy
on youth employment, including anti- radicalization UNDP will establish
partnership framework with  view to integrating new and emerging development
partners With the World Bank, the African Development Bank and the European
Union, UNDP will support the implementation of the five-year plan, ,
particularly by mobilizing resources to finance it Pillar II Participatory
governance and social cohesion The governance focus will be on strengthening
institutions and processes for greater participation and oversight; ensuring
strong legal frameworks for accountability; supporting the national dialogue;
and promoting community conflict prevention and security, including through
peace infrastructure and anti-extremism and radicalization efforts Drawing,
inter alia, on its partnership with the Inter- Parliamentary Union, UNDP will
assist the parliament by working with select committees and the administration
to fulfil their responsibilities, including to improve the transparency and
inclusiveness of the legal and institutional framework for elections (especially
women’ participation) Work with the independent National Electoral Commission
will seek to reinforce its ability to manage elections credibly and inclusively
within  revitalized legal framework Working with the Government, political
actors, civil society, the Electoral Commission and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, UNDP will support the revitalization of the national
framework for political dialogue In partnership with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), UNDP will support national reforms for
access to justice, human rights and security services UNDP will build civil
society capacity to act as  legitimate interface in political and social
dialogue, including on topics such as the electoral process; the promotion of
gender and citizenship; and local development The dynamic partnership UNDP has
built in this sector will be maintained and developed with bilateral and
multilateral actors UNDP will work with national institutions and local
communities to prevent and address violent extremism and radicalization,
including through greater participation To enable the decentralized territorial
councils to deliver high-quality public services, UNDP will deepen its support
to the decentralization process, particularly the transfer of responsibilities
to the territorial councils and partnership with the decentralized
administration This work will be linked to service delivery efforts under pillar
IV, and will use South-South modalities including twinning of towns, Africities,
Environnement et développement du tiers monde (ENDA), and Economie populaire
urbaine  DP/DCP/TCD/ (ECOPOP)23 With  view to supporting peacebuilding and
social cohesion, the local peace committees in vulnerable areas will be
reinforced by involving women, youth, local officials and religious leaders UNDP
will partner with schools and religious institutions to confront youth
radicalization and support local authorities to set up employment incubators and
promote entrepreneurship and socio-economic inclusion This work will be closely
tied to work under the inclusive growth pillar Local plans tied to the five-year
plan in target ‘hot-spot’ areas (Lake Chad, Central African Republic border, the
oil-producing and Eastern regions) will be implemented by exploring innovative
opportunities for participatory financing, decentralized cooperation and
contributions from the diaspora through the Transfer of Knowledge through
Expatriate Nationals programme The National Volunteer Programme launched in the
previous cycle will be leveraged to mobilize youth through  joint approach with
UNFPA, the United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and the Tokyo International Conference on African Development
Collaboration with the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and donors, including
the German Agency for International Cooperation and the European Union will be
explored Partnership around policy dialogues, security and strengthening the
rule of law will be bolstered with technical and financial partners, the Lake
Chad Basin Commission, the - Sahel and other subregional organizations The
subregional border management and border communities project is  good example of
South-South cooperation that will continue Pillar III Environmental resilience
and disaster risk reduction Previous efforts protected biodiversity and helped
the return of endangered species such as lycaon, hippotragus, lions and panthers
Revenues from grazing and multifunctional platforms facilitated the
electrification of rural areas, diversification and transformation of
agricultural products, and the empowerment of women UNDP will build on this work
to improve national and community capacities to ensure the conservation,
sustainable use, access and benefit-sharing of natural resources, biodiversity
and ecosystems In collaboration with the European Union, the Food and
Agriculture Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),
and with support from the Global Environment Facility, the programme will
improve natural resource ecosystems management, particularly in the Lake Chad
basin UNDP will support women’ organizations in accessing adaptation funds The
programme will support access to inclusive, sustainable local solutions to
increase energy efficiency and modern energy access (especially off-grid sources
of renewable energy) To promote clean energy in rural areas, UNDP, in
partnership with UNEP and the European Union, will support the Government in
implementing the national strategy on new and renewable energy Geographic
targeting will be carried out jointly with United Nations partners to transition
towards development in target locations such as Sila, Lake Chad, Kanem, Chari-
Baguirmi, BorkouEnnedi Tibesti, Mandoul and Moyen-Chari24 The impact of climate
change will be sustainably managed through contingency planning, working with
national and regional entities, including selected urban and rural populations
UNDP will seek South-South cooperation and partnership with Green Climate Fund
and the United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries To address the
challenges of urban pressure, UNDP will promote energy- efficient materials,
sustainable management of household waste, and tree planting Implementation of
the urban policy, with  focus on fragile areas, will be supported through joint
action with UN-Habitat 23 ENDA/ECOPOP:  24 Consumption Survey and the Informal
Sector, III, 2011  DP/DCP/TCD/ UNDP will continue to support the Government and
partners through the United Nations disaster risk reduction working group, with
support from the Capacity for Disaster Reduction Initiative The implementation
of the national disaster risk reduction action plan, , will be  priority Pillar
IV Human capital In the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, human
capital is cast in social protection terms The central element will be to reduce
the impact of malaria through delivery of high- quality health services and
improved governance of the health system, with  view of achieving an additional
reduction of 20 per cent in malaria morbidity and mortality and successfully
completing 80 per cent of malaria control support interventions by the end of
UNDP work on human capital will be linked to its decentralization and local
governance support under pillar II, and will focus on building public
administration capacity to deliver improved basic services and respond to
community priorities III Programme and risk management This document outlines
UNDP contributions to national results It serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
allocated to the programme at the country level Accountabilities of managers at
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the internal policies and controls framework The programme will be
nationally executed National implementation will be the preferred modality for
project implementation Implementing partners will be selected with  view to
building sustainability and based on comparative advantage and capacity
assessments By using Harmonized Cash Transfers principles, the risk of lacking
implementation capacity will be mitigated Direct implementation may be explored
when necessary or maintained for ongoing and approved projects Fast-track
procedures can be adopted to provide timely response in crisis situations and
efficiently respond to emerging demands for UNDP support Instability in
neighbouring countries and attacks by Boko Haram are major risks National
budgetary allocations will focus more on security, and less on other programmes
The programme will intensify its advocacy and the mobilization of alternative
sources of funds and in-kind contributions through South-South cooperation, from
traditional bilateral and multilateral partners as well as from thematic funds
This security threat could impede the mobilization and deployment of expertise
in high-risk areas (Lake Chad, borders with the Central African Republic and
Sudan); UNDP will partner with non-governmental organizations to mitigate that
risk Nationally, oil prices will continue to drive economic growth forecasts as
will international donors’ availability of development funds for Chad UNDP has
developed  resource mobilization strategy that, while targeting traditional
development partners, also reaches out to newer partners such as Brazil, Russia,
India, China and South Africa, and Arab foundations UNDP will update partners’
databases; strengthen its communication and visibility; reinforce direct project
costing; and update project pipelines The Government of Chad will be asked to
contribute to the implementation of the programme Any socio-political unrest
could affect operations and security for staff In addition to programme
criticality and United Nations Department of Safety and Security assessments,
the programme focus on promoting inclusive political dialogue and conflict
prevention should lessen these risks An inter- agency contingency plan will be
updated and proactive communication on civic responsibility will be developed
The risk of natural disasters will be managed using the programme focus on
disaster risk reduction and mitigation Appropriate implementation modalities
will be applied to address the frequent turnover in government counterparts
noted during the previous programme  DP/DCP/TCD/ UNDP will strengthen its
internal capacity and establish  strong internal control framework Support from
the Regional Centre in Addis Ababa and the Regional Bureau for Africa, as well
as headquarters-based departments, will be needed to oversee and support the
implementation of the programme UNDP plans  continuous monitoring strategy,
particularly through annual reviews Gender mainstreaming will be ensured and
national capacities in this area will be strengthened All interventions will
guarantee the promotion of human rights Environmental impact assessments will be
conducted and appropriate mitigation measures put into place Implementing
partners will be chosen through systematic use of the Harmonized Approach to
Cash Transfers Quality assurance will involve compliance with norms and
procedures for programme initiation, management and monitoring The 2013 macro
assessment, new tools, spot checks and audits will be systematically applied,
sharing responsibilities for risk management with the Government and partners IV
Monitoring and evaluation Monitoring and evaluation will be done in line with
sustainable development goals targets and indicators, the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, and the monitoring and evaluation framework ()
of the Government, in collaboration with all in-country partners Emphasis will
be on supporting capacities for the National Institute of Statistics, Economic
and Demographic Studies in planning, tracking and monitoring development results
in the context of the goals and government priorities To complement the national
information system, UNDP will conduct socio-economic studies on governance,
sustainable development, eradication of extreme poverty and inequalities
Periodic reviews will be planned with the Government and will be combined with
field visits to monitor the efficient use of resources and ensure the fulfilment
of mutual responsibilities and transparency requirements UNDP will set aside
per cent of its programme budget to address gaps in baseline data and targets,
and training staff and partners in monitoring and evaluation UNDP will conduct
independent evaluations in accordance with the institutional evaluation plan The
‘gender marker’ will be used to monitor programme expenditures and improve
planning and decision-making UNDP will regularly report to the Global Fund on
results achieved, including cross-cutting areas and planned budget The national
malaria information system and the Malaria Indicators Survey will be the main
tools to monitor programme interventions and provide information on the health
impact of malaria control in Chad The Ministry of Planning will manage
cooperation between UNDP and the Government Together with sector ministries and
institutions, it will coordinate annual planning, implementation, monitoring,
evaluation and audits of the programme The Ministry and UNDP will organize
annual joint programme reviews  DP/DCP/TCD/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Chad () National priority or goal: Development of supply,
production and opportunities for decent jobs (priority ; sustainable development
goals (SDGs) ,,,, and 10) United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) outcome  By 2021, the State of Chad puts in place  national development
policy generating inclusive growth and job creation opportunities, particularly
for youth and women, including refugees Related strategic plan outcome:  Growth
and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive
capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded
UNDAF outcome indicators, baselines and targets Data source and frequency of
data collection, and responsibilities Indicative country programme outputs Major
partners and partnership frameworks Indicative resources by outcome (in $
thousands) Poverty rate (urban/rural/by age- group, sex) Baseline: %; target: %
Output  Legal and institutional frameworks are in place for budgeting and
management of extractive resources National and local institutions (NLIs):
Regular: $,325 Planning, advocacy, resources mobilization, monitoring and
evaluation Finance act and budget (annual) Indicator  Number of national and
local strategic frameworks in the budgeting and management of extractives
resources in which sustainable development goals are mainstreamed Baseline: ;
target: 17 Other: $500 Under-employment rate among young people (formal and
informal) (sex, age, vulnerable groups, areas) Baseline: 34%; target: 25% United
Nations system/World Bank/ IMF/AfDB/Global Fund: Technical assistance,
financing, advocacy Consumption survey and the informal sector/Demographic and
health survey, Institut national de la statistique des études économiques et
démographiques (- years) Indicator  Percentage of partners reporting official
development assistance to aid management platform Baseline: 50%Target: 100%
Donors: European Union, France, Germany, Japan Switzerland, United States
Proportion of youth (aged ) not in education, employment or training (formal or
informal), disaggregated by sector, subsector, sex, age and excluded groups
Baseline: 80%; target: 85% Indicator  Number of proposals adopted to mitigate
sector- specific corruption risks Baseline: ; target:  CSOs:
Surveillance/advocacy/ sensitization/information Surveys/NISEDS ( years) South-
South exchanges: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte ’Ivoire and Niger Output
Sustainable value chains are developed and create employment Coverage of cost-
efficient and sustainable energy, disaggregated by rural/urban Activity report
(Ministry of Youth, National Office for Employment Promotion) (quarterly)
Indicator  Number of identified value chains analysed and developed Baseline: ;
target:  per year Private sector: Financing () Percentage of population with
connection to electricity (total) Baseline: %; target: 15% () Percentage of
population with access to non-solid fuels (total) Baseline: %; target: 15%
Indicator  Number of jobs created through analysed value chains Baseline: 950;
target:19,000 Ministry of Regional Planning, Urbanism and Housing (annual)
Output  National and decentralized institutions are able to achieve structural
transformation and create better living conditions and sustainable employment
Activity report (Ministry of Youth, National Office for Employment Promotion),
Indicator  Number of full-time jobs created for women and men 15+ years old
DP/DCP/TCD/ (quarterly) Baseline (women): 550; target: ,550 Baseline (men): 400;
target: ,200 Indicator  Number of additional females and males benefiting from
livelihoods interventions Baseline: 264,418; target: 514,418 for women Baseline:
789,131; target: ,578,262 for men Indicator  Extent to which policies, systems
and institutional measures are in place to generate and strengthen employment
and livelihoods Baseline: ; target:  Indicator  Number of people with access to
financial services Baseline: 214,942; target: ,00,00 National priority or goal:
Improved governance (SDGs 16 and 17) UNDAF outcome: By 2021, national and local
institutions apply more best practices of inclusive governance, promoting
democracy, rule of law, social cohesion, and equitable use of quality public
services including for refugees Related strategic plan outcome:  Citizen
expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met
by stronger systems of democratic governance Election participation rate
Baseline: 72%; target: 85% Sub-Committee on Accreditation Report-NHRI (OHCHR)
Annual – Parliament Judicial Statistical Yearbook (Ministry of Justice, annual)
National Assembly Annual Activity Report (2017, 2018, 2019, 2020) Independent
Electoral Commission Report Every  years Electoral Observation Missions Reports
Every  years Survey on the perception of justice by citizens, European Union, 25
NLIs: Sectoral ministries and agencies: coordination, planning, monitoring and
evaluation Regular: $,Output  Governance institutions at the central and local
level enabled to perform core functions for improved accountability,
participation and representation Other: $12,800 Rate of female parliamentarians
Baseline: 15%; target: 30% Indicator  Extent to which the parliament improves
its capacities for law-making, oversight and representation Baseline: ; target:
United Nations/European Union/ France/Japan/ Switzerland/ United States:
Technical assistance, financing, advocacy, partnership Percentage of women
elected at the local level (elected in 42 communes) Baseline: (14%); target:
(30%) Indicator  Extent to which the Independent National Electoral Commission
manages electoral operations Baseline: ; target:  CSOs: Citizen surveillance and
oversight, advocacy, sensitization, information, partnership Level of
satisfaction among users of the judicial system and for human rights Baseline:
No date; target: 60% Indicator  Number of registered voters Baseline: ,250,000;
target: ,800,000 Number of competencies transferred to decentralized territorial
councils by the Government (health, education) Baseline: ; target: 13 Indicator
Number of women participating as candidates in local and national elections
Baseline: 187; target: 300 Indicator  Extend to which Chadians are confident in
the justice and security systems Baseline: ; target  Perception study on drivers
of insecurity and violent extremism in the border 10 DP/DCP/TCD/ regions of the
Sahel, UNDP, April 2016 Output  Frameworks and procedures for dialogue in place
for effective and transparent engagement of civil society UNDP joint human
security report, 2016 Indicator  Extent to which women, youth and excluded
groups have strengthened capacity to engage in critical development- and crisis-
related issues Baseline: ; target:  Frequency: Annual Five-year national
development plan, October 2016 Indicator  Extent to which women’ and youth
groups contribute to development Baseline: ; target:  Frequency: Annual Output
National institutions and communities enabled to prevent and address violent
extremism and radicalization Indicator  Number of at-risk youth and vulnerable
people with improved livelihoods Baseline: ; target: 150 men, 150 women Five-
year national development plan, October 2016 Indicator  Number of youth in ‘hot-
spot’ areas25 engaged through programming Baseline: ; target: 300 Frequency:
Annual Indicator  Number of new jobs created for young women and men in ‘hot-
spot’ areas Baseline: ; target: 750 for women, 750 for men National priority or
goal: Protection of the environment and adaptation to climate change (SDGs , , ,
12, 13, 14, 15) UNDAF outcome: By 2021, farms, fishing communities and small
producers, notably youth and women, in targeted regions, use sustainable
production systems that allow them to meet their needs, bring food to market and
adopt  living environment that is more resilient to climate change and other
environmental challenges Related strategic plan outcome:  Growth and development
are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create
employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded Penetration rate of
microfinance institutions (MFIs) Baseline: %; target: % Renewable Energy
Development Agency reports (every  years, Agence nationale pour ’environnement
et le développement des énergies renouvelables) NLIs: Sectoral ministries and
agencies: coordination, planning, & Regular: $,Output  Capacities of national
institutions and communities enabled to ensure conservation and management of
natural resources in line with international conventions and national
legislation Other: $25,000 United Nations system/African Development
Bank/Central African State Development Bank: Technical assistance, financing,
synergies, Percentage of households with access to renewable energy (according
to sex of head of household) Indicator : Extent to which policy, legal and
institutional frameworks for conservation, sustainable use, and access and
25Lake Chad, border with Central African Republic and Eastern Chad 11
DP/DCP/TCD/ Baseline: %; target: 10% benefit sharing of natural resources,
biodiversity and ecosystems are in place Baseline: ; target: advocacy National
strategy to promote new and renewable energy (every  to  years, Ministry of
Energy) CSOs: Surveillance advocacy, sensitization, information and oversight,
Number of existing protected areas Baseline:  parks and  wildlife reserves
Target:  parks and 10 wildlife reserves Mortality rate from natural hazards
Baseline: ,01%; target: % Indicator  Extent to which capacities to implement
national and local plans for Integrated Water Resources Management have improved
Baseline: ; target :  Private sector: Financing National Adaptation Plan
document (annual, AGRHYMET Regional Centre) MFI professional associations,
Islamic Development Bank, technical and financial partners Economic loss from
natural hazards (, geo-physical and climate-induced hazards) as  proportion of
GDP Baseline: 37,000/year Target: ,400/year Indicator  Number people benefiting
from improved livelihoods through natural resource management Baseline: ,000;
Target: 12,000 (40% are Women) Green Climate Fund National Development Plan
(annual, Ministry of Planning) Indicator  Number of new management of natural
resources Baseline: ,005; target: ,025 (40 % are women) jobs created through
Chad Habitat country programme document (every  years, Ministry of Housing and
UN-Habitat) Output  Inclusive and sustainable solutions adopted to achieve
energy efficiency and universal modern energy access (especially off-grid
sources of renewable energy) for specific needs of women and men Indicator
Number of new partnerships with funding in targeted underserved communities
Baseline: ; target: Indicator  Percentage of women-headed households benefitting
from improved energy access Baseline: %; target: % Output  National/local
institutions and target populations in urban and rural areas enabled to
sustainably manage floods and drought Indicator  Proportion of population in
flood and drought risk areas covered by national and regional contingency plans
ORSEC Plan (annual, Ministry of Territorial Administration: Direction de la
Protection Civile) Baseline: 15%; target: 45% Indicator  Proportion of
households having access to decent housing Baseline: 28%; target: 38% Output :
The institutional, legal and strategic frameworks (national and sub-national)
for disaster risk reduction (DRR) are operational and include women’ specific
needs 12 DP/DCP/TCD/ Indicator  Number of national and regional plans that are
gender responsive and address disaster and/or climate risk Baseline:; target:
United Nations Contingency Plan, 2016 (annual) and ORSEC Plan (annual) Indicator
Extent to which gender is mainstreamed in the national action plan, the DRR
strategy and mechanism for multi- stakeholder coordination Baseline: Inadequate;
target: High United Nations Contingency Plan, 2016 (annual) National priority or
goal: Human capital improvement (SDGs , , 10, 17) UNDAF outcome: By 2021, the
most vulnerable communities, including women, teenagers and children under
years and refugees in targeted areas, use high-quality integrated health,
nutrition, HIV and malaria prevention and care services Related strategic plan
outcome:  Countries have strengthened institutions to progressively deliver
universal access to basic services Ministry of Public Health, National malaria
country programme, UNICEF Regular: $340  Output  Population has increased access
to preventive and treatment services for malaria Sector/multiple indicator
cluster survey ( to  years) Surveys/NISEDS National Malaria country programme
reports National health information system Half-yearly Other: Global Fund:
$23,563 Indicator  Total estimated malaria cases having received frontline anti-
malarial treatment in public health facilities Baseline: 959,582; target:
,449,154 Indicator  Percentage of women who have received at least  doses of
intermittent preventive treatment Baseline: No data; target: 45% Indicator
Number of insecticide-treated nets distributed to individuals during the mass
distribution campaign Baseline: 3867,131; target: ,976,390 Output  National
institutions, systems, laws and policies enabled for equitable, accountable and
effective delivery of malaria and related services National malaria country
programme reports Indicator  Proportion suspected case of malaria submitted to
parasitological testing in public sector health institutions Baseline: 75%;
target: 90% Output  Capacity of public administration at national and
decentralized levels enabled to deliver improved basic services and respond to
community’ priorities HACT evaluation, Ministry of Local Governance
Administration, annual Indicator  Level of capacity of subnational
governments/administrations for planning and budgeting delivery 13 DP/DCP/TCD/
of basic services Baseline: ; target:  Indicator  Level of capacity of
subnational governments/administrations for monitoring delivery of basic
services Baseline: Partial; target: comprehensive 14