Table of Contents:  Programme rationale   : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships: Page:  III Programme and risk management: Page:  IV Monitoring and
evaluation  : Page:  DP/DCP/IRN/  Programme rationale  The overarching rationale
for the UNDP country programme in the Islamic Republic of Iran is to support the
Government in achieving its sustainable and inclusive development objectives
This rationale, aimed at 'leaving no one behind', is consistent with the
priorities set out in the country' 6th Five-Year Development Plan, the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) , the UNDP Strategic Plan,  and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  The Islamic Republic of Iran is an
upper-middle income country According to the Human Development Report 2015, the
country has  Human Development Index value of 766, placing it in the ‘high human
development’ category, ranked 69 of 188 countries The past few decades have
witnessed an impressive reduction of absolute poverty in the country; only 02
per cent of the population are estimated to be living below the $25 per day
poverty line According to the Human Development Report 2015, between 1980 and
2014, life expectancy at birth increased by years, mean years of schooling
increased by  years and expected years of schooling increased by  years  The
country has  vast natural resource endowment and can draw heavily upon its
large, young, tech-savvy and growing population The diversified Iranian economy
benefits from the Government' reform agenda Projected rising incomes and
improved purchasing power will strengthen the already large urban middle class
Notwithstanding some economic barriers, the overall trend is towards greater
openness with trade and investment facilitators benefiting from sectoral reform
packages An optimistic scenario would foresee  rapid recovery in oil export
volumes (drawing upon the country' large and underexploited oil and gas
reserves),  resurgence in consumer spending and officially backed trade These
would, following current trends, allow the Islamic Republic of Iran to become
one of if not the fastest growing economies in the Middle East and North Africa
region  While the level of poverty has fallen in absolute terms, relative
poverty and non- inclusive growth continue to remain challenges The official
unemployment rate reached per cent in 2014 (per cent for women and  per cent for
men) and was higher (per cent) among those aged  years The Gini coefficient
still stands at 36, indicating relatively high income inequality The gap between
the leading and lagging geographical regions has widened since the early 1990s
key challenge for the Government is to continue to diversify the economy and
establish  more sustainable economic growth paradigm which generates
opportunities for sustainable and inclusive employment  Because of the country'
dry climate, rapid urbanization (the urban population increased from million in
1976 to million in 2011) and high economic dependence on oil and gas production,
it faces some particularly acute environmental challenges, many of which are
expected to be compounded by ongoing climate change that, among others, will
make the region hotter and drier Unsustainable farming, land use and management
practices, as well as the unsustainable use of ecosystems, contribute to reduced
vegetation cover, soil erosion, desertification, shrinking wetlands and loss of
biodiversity Groundwater sources are being overused, some rivers have dried out
and some wetlands are disappearing The agricultural sector uses the major
portion of the country' water, but according to official figures, does so
inefficiently Ongoing reforms that support sustainable natural resource
management are therefore required, including with respect to better accounting
for the value of ecosystem services Regional collaborative action is required to
address the problem of unsustainable land and water use within the main regional
watersheds, many of which overlap Iranian borders The  As explained in Iran’
national statement following the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals
Statistical Centre of Iran, Statistical Centre of Iran, The Income and
Expenditure Census 2012, Statistical Centre of Iran  Statistical Centre of Iran,
Statistical Centre of Iran, Evaluation of the Overall Policies on the Water
Management System: Volume , Secretariat of the Expediency Council, DP/DCP/IRN/
drying out of neighbouring countries to the west is  major cause of the sand and
dust storms impacting the Islamic Republic of Iran  The Persian Gulf region
contains more than 65 per cent of the world’ known oil reserves Marine
environmental problems both in this region and the Caspian Sea are mainly the
result of numerous oil and related commercial activities undertaken by the
countries and the multinational companies operating there Resultant pollution
has caused significant damage to the ecosystem in coral reefs, mangroves and
other habitats  Populated areas across the country experience high levels of air
pollution, with attendant negative health impacts The energy sector has focused
its efforts primarily on meeting energy demand (which grew by  per cent annually
during recent years) With accelerated economic growth expected in the medium
term, the country now has now  unique opportunity to improve the efficiency of
energy production and use, and increase the share of renewables in its energy
mix The Government has identified promoting  low-carbon economy as one of its
priorities in its 6th Five-Year National Development Plan  Non-communicable
diseases are  rapidly emerging public health threat in the world and in the
Islamic Republic of Iran It is estimated that by 2020, non-communicable diseases
such as diabetes, cardiovascular and cardio-pulmonary diseases and cancers will
account for over 76 per cent of all premature deaths in the country Among the
main risk factors such as smoking, alcohol consumption, physical inactivity and
inadequate nutrition, the highest disability-adjusted life year10 rate is
related to nutrition If not adequately managed, non-communicable diseases have
the potential to undermine the country’ achievement of Sustainable Development
Goal  (health and well-being) At the global level, UNDP and the World Health
Organization (WHO) have agreed to collaborate on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases  The prevalence of HIV among people who inject drugs
is slowly decreasing However, according to  Ministry of Health and Medical
Education concept note, during  the percentage of people identified to have
contracted HIV through other transmission routes increased almost  times, from
20 to 30 per cent The National Strategic Plan on HIV/AIDS has recently been
revised to align with the global goal calling for elimination of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic by 11 UNDP has played  positive supporting role in helping the
Government to develop this plan, in close collaboration with the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and WHO While early elimination of
falciparum malaria has been achieved in some target areas ( of 11 provinces
reported zero cases in the period October 2014-September 2015),12 the country
remains concerned about the risk of reintroduction of the disease from
neighboring countries Similarly, while the country now has  relatively low rate
of tuberculosis (according to the 2015 Global Tuberculosis Report, notification
rates have dropped from 143 per 100,000 in 1964 to per 100,000 in 2014), multi-
drug-resistant tuberculosis is still considered  public health threat,
particularly in eastern border areas Over the past decade, UNDP has served as
the main channel for Iranian access to resources from the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and will continue to provide this support The
Islamic Republic of Iran is considered to be highly disaster-prone The 2009
Global Assessment Report on disaster risk reduction put it in the high level of
‘multiple mortality risk class’ The country undergoes an average of  critical
natural disasters per year Earthquakes pose the greatest risk, given that 70 per
cent of the total population live in densely packed urban areas Given its
practical experiences, the Government is  Statistical Centre of Iran, National
Action Plan for Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases and Related
Risk Factors in the Islamic Republic of Iran,  The disability-adjusted life year
is  measure of overall disease burden, expressed as the number of years lost due
to ill-health, disability or early death 11 Fourth National Strategic Plan on
HIV Control in the Islamic Republic of Iran, 12 Progress updates by the Centre
for Disease Control of Ministry of Health on the National Malaria Elimination
Programme  DP/DCP/IRN/ well prepared for initial relief and response, although
more attention is needed to disaster preparedness, resilience and risk
management Women require special attention in both disaster preparedness and
risk reduction and management, given the burden of risk to which they are
exposed and the pivotal role they play in managing household assets and welfare
UNDP has an opportunity to strengthen its disaster risk reduction management
support by more closely integrating this work with its portfolio of work on the
environment, and through strengthening synergies with other United Nations
agencies such as the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) The
UNDP contribution to Iranian development priorities in the previous country
programme cycle has been in the areas of environment, health and integrated
natural resource management Examples include supporting the Government' plans
for improving rural livelihoods and water and land management; and improving
technical and administrative support to key partner institutions on HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria and communicable disease control UNDP is acknowledged for
its technical and administrative support to the Government’ fight against
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, as principal recipient of funding from the
Global Fund, and its contribution to the updating and improvement of the
Government’ national plans for communicable disease control UNDP support to the
Government in formulating macro-level socioeconomic plans and improving
institutional management capacities for disaster risk reduction has not realized
its full potential, in significant part because these initiatives were not
adequately integrated with other areas of UNDP (and wider United Nations)
support In the light of lessons learned during the last country programme cycle,
the country' upper middle-income status, declining regular resources funding for
UNDP programmes and country office operations and the agreed priorities for
cooperation as set out in the UNDAF, , UNDP support to the Islamic Republic of
Iran will comprise: () supporting the Government to address rapidly emerging
non-communicable diseases, in collaboration with WHO; () supporting resource
mobilization, advocacy and awareness-raising initiatives for achieving country
programme outcomes; () supporting government priorities for regional and South-
South cooperation, primarily through facilitating the development of contacts,
cooperation and communication mechanisms Enhanced regional cooperation will be
required to help address regional watershed management issues, marine pollution
and the spread of diseases across borders; () supporting the Government in
devising policies in areas such as eradication of extreme poverty, reduction in
inequalities and bringing about  more inclusive and sustainable economy; ()
facilitating technology transfer and mobilization of new and additional
financial resources II Programme priorities and partnerships The country
programme for  will support the Government in attaining the outcomes of the
UNDAF , the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and 6th Five-Year
Development Plan () The three priority areas in the 6th Five- Year Development
Plan include: () promoting  resilient economy; () progress in science and
technology; and () promotion of cultural excellence The country programme will
centre its support primarily on promoting  resilient economy through four key
areas: environmentally sustainable development; health and development; social
welfare, poverty eradication and sustainable employment; and disaster risk
reduction and management In supporting the Government to accelerate its national
development efforts in these four priority areas, in line with the structure and
sequence of the UNDAF outcomes UNDP will give particular focus to supporting
government initiatives that address the needs of the urban and rural poor and
young men and women who need sustainable through supporting employment Women’
economic empowerment, including  DP/DCP/IRN/ government programmes to assist
female-headed households, will also be given particular emphasis UNDP will
continue its support to the Government through engagement with people living
with HIV/AIDS, those at high risk of contracting tuberculosis or malaria and
those most vulnerable to non-communicable diseases Geographically, UNDP will
support the Government’ work in disadvantaged and environmentally-stressed areas
The overall vision for this country programme is that UNDP will make  clear and
substantive contribution to advancing the resilience of the Iranian economy
through sustainable and inclusive development, and be  clear partner of choice
for both the Government and other development partners when strengthen
multidisciplinary and multi-agency responses to sustainable development
challenges seeking to Environmentally sustainable development (Sustainable
Development Goals , , , , , 12, 13, 14 and 17) UNDP will continue to support
integrated natural resource management and biodiversity initiatives started in
previous country programme period This will include scaling-up of the adopted
models for management of wetlands and drylands, as well as biodiversity and
conservation mainstreaming in all types of ecosystems, including forests
Participatory planning and management approaches and the creation of new
livelihood opportunities, including for disadvantaged and female-headed
households, will remain  key thrust of the recommended approach UNDP will work
with the Government to identify new areas in which pilot initiatives can be
developed and implemented, such as for water resources management, addressing
pollution and urban environmental challenges (, air pollution and solid waste
management) and sustainable management of marine resources UNDP will seek to
work with line ministries, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to
strengthen opportunities for regional dialogue and action on cross- border
environmental issues such as regional watershed management, sand and dust
storms, marine pollution and transboundary air pollution UNDP will engage at the
institutional level to help develop technical capacities, systems for and
awareness of the better valuing of ecosystem services and natural resources and
taking these into account in development planning and budgeting Developing an
environmentally sustainable growth paradigm, which also impacts positively upon
sustainable job creation objectives, will help the Government to meet its long-
term sustainable development ambitions UNDP will support government efforts to
reduce the economy’ carbon footprint by providing access to knowledge products,
technical expertise and evidence regarding potential solutions, including with
respect to core issues such as increasing the efficiency of energy production
and use; and diversifying energy sources and increasing the share of renewable
energy UNDP will continue to assist the Government in preparing its national
communication on the implementation of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change With respect to climate change adaptation, UNDP will inter
alia assist the Government to develop strategies and plans for making more
efficient and effective use of water in the agriculture sector, while at the
same time protecting the livelihoods of small-scale farmers This work will be
undertaken in close collaboration with other United Nations agencies including
the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations UNDP will support
government efforts to re-establish systems for effectively monitoring and
managing persistent organic pollutants and to implement the plan to phase out
use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), phase  of which starts in Initial focus
will be on safe disposal of the current inventory of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) held by the power-generation sector Health and development (Sustainable
Development Goals  and ) In the short to medium term, UNDP will continue to help
coordinate the United Nations response to HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, in
close collaboration with UNAIDS and WHO, through support to the Government in
utilizing Global Fund resources and implementing its workplans UNDP will support
the Government’  DP/DCP/IRN/ programmes on promoting cross-sectoral integration
and coherence in communicable disease response There will likely remain longer-
term opportunities for UNDP to provide support to the Government’ HIV/AIDS and
other communicable disease programmes UNDP will continue to develop and expand
its joint work with the Ministry of Health and Medical Education on non-
communicable diseases, in collaboration with WHO and other United Nations
agencies The primary focus and strength of UNDP include: () supporting increased
collaboration by public health and non-health sectors in the national non-
communicable disease response; () helping to develop the case for investment in
combating non-communicable diseases; and () promoting and supporting the
expansion and transition of Global Fund activities to non-communicable disease
activities UNDP would also support joint advocacy for innovative responses to
non- communicable diseases Given the country' strong track record in combating
HIV, malaria and tuberculosis, and building on its experience in convening and
facilitating the 'G5' group for regional cooperation on health system
strengthening, opportunities will be explored and proposed for developing  more
systematic and programmatic approach to allow the Islamic Republic of Iran to
share its knowledge and experience within the G5 and beyond Resilient economy:
Social welfare, poverty eradication and sustainable employment (Sustainable
Development Goals , , , , , 10 and 17) UNDP will support the Multidimensional
Poverty Index to integrate the concept of multidimensional poverty into
policymaking and planning processes within key institutions The purpose would be
to help the Government to prioritize and target policies and subsequent
investments aimed at reducing relative poverty and eliminating absolute poverty,
both spatially, , in disadvantaged provinces and environmentally degraded areas,
and among specific populations, , youth and female-headed households This will
build on UNDP work on  national social protection model currently underway the
Government to further develop and refine In collaboration with the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UN-Habitat, UNDP will support the Government
to update the definitions and standards of rural and urban poverty, including
for housing, and help to promote the use of this data, as appropriate, to
enhance multisectoral responses to identified needs Employment generation is
key government priority and is linked to reducing relative poverty and promoting
inclusive and sustainable growth While it is anticipated that future economic
growth and job creation including vocational training will occur in the
established sectors of the economy, UNDP will support government efforts to
diversify and deepen job-creation opportunities, with  particular focus on
developing innovative schemes and programmes, in particularly at local and
subnational levels, to create more small and medium enterprises and social
enterprises that also deliver socially and environmentally desirable benefits
UNDP support will be linked with livelihood- creation initiatives supported
under the environment outcome Youth, including young women and unemployed
graduates, will be  particular focus of efforts for social enterprise job
creation through UNDP international technical support and seed funding Resilient
Economy: Natural disaster management (Sustainable Development Goals  and 11)
UNDP will support the Government to improve its disaster risk reduction and
resilience capacities in the context of the Sendai Framework will continue to
work with relevant authorities in preparation of  national disaster risk
management strategy and action plan Upon the plan’ approval, UNDP will support
its effective implementation through enhancing institutional capacities Building
on experience in the previous programme cycle, UNDP will provide technical
support and access to international best practice/expertise, and that promote
multi-stakeholder participation and cooperation including enhanced synergies of
effort between relevant facilitate arrangements  DP/DCP/IRN/ United Nations
agencies including the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and UN-Habitat UNDP will support the Government in the generation,
analysis and use of up-to-date data on disaster risk This will likely include
support for the preparation and updating of national-level disaster risk
assessment and vulnerability maps (especially for residents of disadvantaged and
vulnerable locales), both for individual and multiple hazard risks UNDP will
help the designated entities to prioritize the needs of specific populations
such as the disadvantaged, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities in
disaster preparedness planning, and help to conduct awareness-raising and
advocacy programmes for effectively enhancing community resilience to natural
disasters The Government remains the most critical partner of UNDP, and ongoing
priority will be given to further strengthening the mechanism by which the
Government and UNDP collaborate Key institutional partners are listed in the
results and resources framework (annex) UNDP will support the achievement of
country programme priorities through its collaborative working arrangements with
other parts of the United Nations system in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
regionally and globally, and with other international development partners
Accessing support and expertise from diverse sources through collaborative
partnership arrangements is at the core of the UNDP approach to facilitating and
supporting sustainable development goals UNDP will support the enhanced regional
cooperation required to help address regional watershed management issues,
marine pollution in the Persian Gulf and the spread of communicable diseases
across borders, as well as increasing government efforts to engage in broader
South-South cooperation, for example by sharing its knowledge and expertise in
controlling communicable diseases and in responding to natural disasters III
Programme and risk management This country programme document outlines the UNDP
contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at the
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures
and the internal controls framework The UNDP social and environmental standards
and screening procedure will be applied to ensure benefits are realized and
risks appropriately identified and managed Necessary resource allocation in the
form of direct project costs will be applied to maintain the effective and
efficient human resource capacity of the UNDP country office The key assumptions
underpinning the country programme are that: () the Government continues to
value the UNDP role in supporting its efforts towards  resilient economy through
sustainable and equitable development and actively supports and facilitates
implementation of the country programme; () UNDP, in partnership with
Government, can mobilize adequate financial resources to support the operations
of the county office and funding for specific programmes and projects ; () UNDP
will continue to focus on testing and demonstrating solutions that can be scaled
up as one of the key approaches across the country programme; and () UNDP
continues to strengthen synergies with other United Nations agencies and its own
results-based management systems and capacities The risks to country programme
implementation have been identified as: diminishing UNDP programme resources,
including for cost-sharing; regional disease outbreaks and regional watershed
management crises; lack of expected funding from the Global Environment
Facility; and an inability to resolve audit-related issues regarding the use of
government cost-sharing allocated to UNDP UNDP will manage risk through  process
of ongoing dialogue with the Government to ensure that strategic risks are
identified, monitored and mitigated in  timely manner Internally, risk
management and mitigation processes are based on established UNDP  DP/DCP/IRN/
procedures, underpinned by project specific risk management plans The country
programme will be nationally executed The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will
represent the Government for the purposes of this country programme  National
Steering Committee, co-chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and UNDP and
comprising implementing ministries and other relevant agencies, will hold an
annual programme review meeting IV Monitoring and evaluation All programme
interventions will be guided by  measurable, and clearly defined, results
framework Data for outcome indicators, including gender disaggregated data, will
be sourced from the Statistical Centre of Iran The Government and UNDP may
nevertheless agree on additional primary data collection and /or additional
analysis of already available data sources in order to help measure outcome-
level progress UNDP will collaborate closely with UNFPA on issues related to
strengthening national data systems and quality, given their ongoing and active
engagement with the Statistical Centre of Iran The Steering Committee will
review contributions to national results at the end of each year and may endorse
necessary adjustments to the country programme to ensure that results are met
Output-level monitoring will continue to rely primarily on project-level
monitoring and evaluation processes, placing greater emphasis on targeting,
development of robust baselines, joint monitoring and evaluation activities
(between UNDP, the Government and other United Nations agencies), and maximizing
synergies across the programme portfolio Projects will be expected to allocate
at least  per cent of funds to monitoring and evaluation and  per cent of funds
to communication and advocacy activities To strengthen the quality and relevance
of its services, UNDP will devise  multi- year policy research agenda and in
coordination with Ministry of Foreign Affairs, will work with other development
agencies, national research institutes and academia to generate and promote
evidence to inform policies on critical issues related to sustainable
development and equitable growth Upon government request and through the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, UNDP will provide technical support to map the
Sustainable Development Goals indicators and targets to the relevant government
sectoral development plans and strategies The country programme will follow the
framework principles as stipulated in section  of the UNDAF, 2017-DP/DCP/IRN/
Annex Results and resources framework for the Islamic Republic of Iran () The
results and resources framework is, in spirit and content, subject to the main
body of the terms and references of the UNDP country programme document,
2017-All figures in the results and resources framework are drawn from national
sources of data OUTCOME : Responsible government agencies formulate, implement
and monitor integrated natural resource management, low carbon economy, and
climate change policies and programmes more effectively (UNDAF outcomes  and )
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Articles of the 6th National Development Plan (draft)
RELEVANT Sustainable Development Goals: , , , , , 12, 13, 14 and 17 RELATED UNDP
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable,
incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for
the poor and excluded DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE RESOURCES BY OUTCOME ($) CPD OUTCOME INDICATOR(),
BASELINES, TARGET() INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS MAJOR PARTNERS 13
Annual emissions of CO2 in million metric tons Baseline (2010): 855 million tons
Target (2030): 787 million tons (reduction of %) Ministry of Energy, Department
of Environment, Ministry of Agriculture Jihad official records and Statistical
Centre of Iran data, collected and analysed annually Department of Environment
Output : Strategies and measures that promote sustainable and integrated
management of natural resources, biodiversity and ecosystem services are
developed and considered for adoption / implementation by the Islamic Republic
of Iran Regular $553,000 Forests, Range and Watershed Organization Other $104
million Indicators: : Hectares of land/rangeland/forest being reclaimed or used
sustainably for agriculture under pilot projects and scale-up schemes Baseline
(2015): 109,764 hectares Target: 200,000 hectares Ministry of Energy  Global
Environment  Percentage of land area that is managed sustainably under an in-
situ conservation regime,  sustainable use regime and / or an access and
benefits sharing regime Baseline (2015): % Target (2020): At least 17 per cent
Ministry of Mines, Industry and Commerce Facility (GEF) STAR: $16 million, :
Number of sectoral guidelines with budget allocation for mainstreaming
biodiversity conservation into development planning Baseline (2015): 28 Target :
40 Ministry of Agriculture Jihad  GEF non-STAR: Ministry of Interior $ million
Ministry of Petroleum  Green Climate Fund : Number of coordination mechanisms
to address trans-boundary issues Baseline (2015):  Target:  Management and
Planning Organization  Government cost- Tons of ozone depletion potential (ODP)
used Baseline (2015): 309 ODP tons Target (2020): 260 ODP tons sharing /co-
financing: $70 Million FAO Output : Climate change adaptation and mitigation
solutions developed and considered for adoption / implementation by the Islamic
Republic of Iran  Third party cost- Indicators: : Hectares of agricultural land
benefiting from water saving measures Baseline (2015): 10,000 sharing: $10
million  Disposal of the current 13 Allocation of TRAC resources will be decided
by the UNDP Country Programme Steering Committee and its co-chairs, the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and UNDP  DP/DCP/IRN/ persistent organic pollutants (POPs)
inventory and importation control of POPs in general and of PCBs in particular
Baseline (2015): 11,000 tons of PCB oil and equipment (approx) Target (2020):
2000 tons of low PCB contaminated oil and equipment as well as 100 tons of
highly contaminated PCB oil and equipment and 80 tonnes of agricultural POPs
Target: 25,000 : Sustainable adaptive/climate resilient solutions identified and
tested in water and agriculture sectors Baseline (2015):  Target:  : Amount of
CO2 equivalent mitigated and energy efficiency/ conservation achieved with
focus on industry and residential sectors Baseline (2015): TBD Target: TBD
Output : The Islamic Republic of Iran’ institutional capacities to meet HCFC and
POP phase out commitments are enhanced Indicators:  Number of enhanced systems
established for control of HCFCs and POPs Baseline :  (already in place for
HCFCs) Target:  (system for POPs re-established and for HCFC enhanced) OUTCOME :
The health sector in the Islamic Republic of Iran formulates, implements and
monitors policies and programmes on HIV/AIDS, other communicable diseases and
non- communicable disease more effectively (UNDAF Outcomes  and ) NATIONAL
PRIORITY: Articles of the 6th National Development Plan (draft); Islamic
Republic of Iran’ Overall Health Policies; and the Islamic Republic of Iran’
Health Transformation Plan (Health Sector Evolution Plan) RELEVANT Sustainable
Development Goals:  and  RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Countries have
strengthened institutions to progressively deliver universal access to basic
services Regular13 $553,000  Percentage of adults and children with HIV,
disaggregated by sex and age, known to be on treatment 12 months after
initiation of antiretroviral therapy Baseline (2013): - Male: 87% - - - Target:
TBD Official database of Ministry of Health and Medical Education, collected and
analysed annually Ministry of Health and Medical Education Output : Strategies,
mechanisms and tools to further strengthen implementation of the National
Strategic Plans on HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria and other communicable diseases are
developed and considered for adoption by the Islamic Republic of Iran Other: $14
million Prisons Organisation Ministry of Welfare Indicators: : Number of
Universities of Medical Sciences that have developed, budgeted, and implemented
HIV and malaria action plans Baseline (2015):  Target: 16  Global Fund $ + $
million Ministry of Education Female: 21% Age < 15: 58% Age 15+: 58% 
Government cost- Secretariat of the High Council of Free Trade Zones sharing: $
million : Number of malaria and/or other vector-borne disease
control/elimination plans coordinated and facilitated by UNDP in Economic Free
Zones Baseline (2015):  Target:  WHO  Number of laboratory- confirmed
autochthonous malaria cases in target districts, disaggregated by age and sex
UNAIDS : Number of multisectoral and/or sustainability plans and budgets
developed in accordance with National Strategic Plans (HIV/AIDS, malaria) 10
DP/DCP/IRN/ Baseline (2015): 263 (72% male and 75% over 15 years old) Target
(2021): 26 Baseline (2015):  Target:  Output  Solutions that help address
priority NCDs are identified, developed and considered for adoption /
implementation by the Government  Number of foci with local malaria
transmissions): Baseline (2015): 304 Target (2021): 76 Indicators: : Number of
NCD related multisector plans developed and approved Baseline (2015):  Target:
Number of deaths due to non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in both sexes and in
the age groups of 30 to 75 years old Baseline (2010): 75,150 Target (2025): 25%
reduction in morality (based on the population of the target year) due to NCDs
Output : Opportunities for Iran to share its experience on HIV/AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis elimination /control with other interested countries are developed
and considered by the Government for implementation Indicators: : Number of
solutions that are implemented in neighbouring countries involving Iranian
expertise/national best-practice Baseline (2015):  Target:  OUTCOME : Relevant
government agencies formulate, implement and monitor their social welfare,
poverty eradication and sustainable employment policies and programmes more
effectively (UNDAF Outcomes  and ) NATIONAL PRIORITY: Articles of the 6th
National Development Plan (draft) RELEVANT Sustainable Development Goals: , , ,
, , 10 and 17 RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Growth and development are
inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create
employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded Regular13 $590,000 SCI –
unemployment, inequality and poverty (yearly reporting) Ministry of Cooperative,
Labour and Welfare – poverty (bi yearly reporting) Central Bank – GDP growth
(yearly reporting) MPO – planning documents MIMT surveys (annual)
Multidimensional Poverty, disaggregated by urban and rural areas Baseline
(2015): circa 20% (Ministry of Cooperative, Labour and Welfare survey) Target:
less than 10% Ministry of Cooperative, Labour and Welfare Output : Enhanced
strategies and measures to achieve inclusive growth and poverty reduction are
developed and considered for adoption / implementation by the Government Other $
million Management and Planning Organization Indicators:  Number of sectors /
key national institutions systematically using Multi- Dimensional Poverty Index
data, to inform policy development and investment targeting on the poor Baseline
(2015) -  Target: TBD by Ministry of Cooperative, Labour and Welfare and
Management and  Trust funds: Planning Organization $25 million  Government
cost- Ministry of Industry, Mine and Trade sharing: $25 million Proportion of
working poor, disaggregated by age and sex Baseline (year): TBD by Ministry of
Cooperative, Labour and Welfare Target: TBD by Ministry of Cooperative, Labour
and Ministry of Roads and Urban Development Directorate of Rural Development and
Deprived Areas in the Office of the Vice-President  Number of sectors and
institutions using updated urban poverty definitions, standards and maps to
inform policy development and investment targeting Baseline (2015) –  (Ministry
of Roads and Urban Development) Target: TBD by Ministry of Roads and Urban
Development; Ministry of Industry, 11 DP/DCP/IRN/ Welfare Mine and Trade;
Ministry of Cooperative, Labour and Welfare Output : Innovative sustainable
employment strategies and measures are developed and considered for adoption /
implementation by the Islamic Republic of Iran Unemployment rate, disaggregated
by age, sex and province Baseline (year): Unemployment is officially 12% Target:
% unemployment by end of 6th Plan period Indicators: Indicator : Number of new
jobs and other livelihoods created with UNDP support, disaggregated by age, sex
and province Baseline (2015):  National Sustainable Employment Plan indicates
fresh start (zero baseline) for unemployment reduction Target: National target
,000,000 new jobs by Number of measures adopted by Government that ensure most
vulnerable groups are covered under the new multi-layer social insurance systems
Baseline (year): TBD Target: Comprehensive national plan available OUTCOME :
Relevant government agencies formulate, implement and monitor natural disaster
management policies and programmes more effectively (UNDAF Outcome ) NATIONAL
PRIORITY: Articles of the 6th National Development Plan (draft); Integrated
National Disaster Management Plan RELEVANT Sustainable Development Goals:  and
11 RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Countries are able to reduce the
likelihood of conflict and lower the risk of natural disasters, including from
climate change 13 Data source and responsibility: Ministry of Cooperative,
Labour and Welfare, Iranian Red Crescent Society, Management and Planning
Organization National Disaster Management Organization Number of multisectoral /
hazard disaster risk management plans in place, consistent with the Sendai
Framework for DRR and the new National Strategy, based on up-to date risk
assessment data and taking into account differentiated impacts on men and women
and different socioeconomic groups Baseline (2016):  Target:  Output : Measures
and tools that improve the preparation and implementation of multi-sectoral and
multi-hazard DRR plans are developed and considered for adoption /
implementation by the Islamic Republic of Iran Regular $590,000 Management and
Planning Organization Other $ million Indicators: : Knowledge, attitudes and
practices (KAP) on DRR among partner institutions / target groups Baseline
(2016): TBD through KAP survey Target (2021): 25+ % increase in KAP scores
Frequency of data collection: once  year Tehran Disaster Mitigation and
Management Organization  Government cost- sharing: $ million Iranian Red
Crescent Society Output : Options and mechanisms for effectively enhancing
community resilience to natural disasters are developed and considered for
adoption / implementation by the Islamic Republic of Iran  Third-party cost-
Ministry of Roads and Urban Development sharing: $ million International
Institute of Earthquake Engineering and Seismology (affiliated to Ministry
Number of enhanced institutional arrangements / regulatory provisions in place
Indicators: : Number of community-based pilot projects supported by UNDP, and
evidence of adoption for scale-up by the Government 12 DP/DCP/IRN/ at national
and subnational levels for managing disaster / climate risks, Baseline (2016):
Target:  of Science, Research and Technology) Baseline (2015):  Target:
Ministry of Health and Medical Education Department of Environment OCHA UN-
Habitat 13