 Nigeria National Gas Policy THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA -
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-- NATIONAL GAS POLICY ---------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------- The purpose of this document is to define the policy
of the Federal Government in respect of Nigeria’ natural gas endowment,
establish its medium to long-term targets for gas reserves growth and
utilisation and record strategies to be pursued to ensure the successful
implementation of the policy in accordance with Nigeria’ national socio-economic
development priorities Ministry of Petroleum Resources  Table of Contents:
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY : Page: 13  INTRODUCTION : Page: 17  VISION AND OBJECTIVES:
Page: 32  GOVERNANCE : Page: 35 Table of Contents:  INDUSTRY STRUCTURE: Page: 50
DEVELOPING GAS RESOURCES: Page: 57  INFRASTRUCTURE : Page: 65  BUILDING GAS
MARKETS : Page: 68 Table of Contents:  DEVELOPING NATIONAL HUMAN RESOURCES :
Page: 83 COMMUNICATIONS : Page: 89 Table of Contents: ROADMAP AND ACTION PLAN:
Page: 91 Nigeria National Gas Policy LIST OF FIGURES Figure : World Proved Gas
Reserves Ranking (2015)  18 Figure : Major Global LNG and Pipeline Gas Flows,
2015  24 Figure : Nigerian LNG Trade Flows, 2015  24 Figure :  Mountain of New
Supplies over the Next  years  25 Figure : LNG and Gas Flows to Asia, 2015  26
Figure : LNG and Gas Flows to South America, 2015  27 Figure : LNG and Gas Flows
to Europe, 2015  28 Figure : National Petroleum Policy Directorate  40 Figure :
Commercial Structure for Gas Sector  55 Figure 10: Petroleum Basins in Nigeria
58 Figure 11: World’ Top  Natural Gas Flaring Countries, 2014  60 Figure 12: Gas
Flaring Trend in Nigeria,   61 Figure 13: Map of Nigeria showing Gas Demand and
Infrastructure  66 Figure 14: West African Gas Pipeline, Route  70 Figure 15:
Trans-Saharan Gas Pipeline, Route  70 Figure 16: Nigerian Household Energy Mix
77 Figure 17: Timeline of Gas Policy Roadmap  98 Ministry of Petroleum Resources
Nigeria National Gas Policy LIST OF TABLES Table : Nigerian Gas Production and
Utilisation ()  19 Table : Monthly Gas Price Movements at Major Pricing Points
()  22 Table : Nigerian Associated and Non-Associated Gas Production ()  57
Table : Proved Reserves and Resources in Place across Ownership Types  59 Table
: Energy Equivalence of LPG  77 Table : Roadmap, Short Term (Months),
Institutional  92 Table : Roadmap, Medium Term (One to Two Years), Regulatory
94 Table : Roadmap, Long-Term (Over Two Years), Industry  97 Ministry of
Petroleum Resources  Nigeria National Gas Policy ABBREVIATIONS African
Development Bank Associated Gas Associated Gas Framework Agreement Bank of
Industry (Nigeria) Bureau for Public Entreprise Billion tons oil equivalent
Central Bank of Nigeria Carbon Dioxide AfDB AG AGFA BoI BPE Btoe CBN CO2
Combined Cycle Gas Turbine Clean Development Mechanism Compressed Natural Gas
Central Processing Facility Corporate Social Responsibility Distributed
Generation Electricity distribution company in Nigeria Dual Purpose Kerosene
CCGT CDM CNG CPF CSR DG DISCO / Disco DPK Department of Petroleum Resources
Domestic Gas Supply Obligation Energy Commission of Nigeria Environmental Impact
Assessment DPR DSO /DGSO ECN EIA Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Escravos Lagos Pipeline System Export Parity Price,  netback gas price from
export price Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program European Union European Union Delegation Federal Government
of Nigeria Laws of the Federation of Nigeria Liquefied Petroleum Gas EITI ELPS
EPP ESIA ESMAP EU EUD FGN LFN LPG Nigerian Association of Liquefied Petroleum
Gas Marketers NALPGAM Federal Ministry of Environment FMEnv Final Investment
Decision Federal Ministry of Industry Trade and Investment FID FMITI Federal
Ministry of Power Federal Ministry of Petroleum Resources Front End Engineering
and Design Fiscal Rules of General Application FMP ()MPR FEED FRGA Ministry of
Petroleum Resources  Nigeria National Gas Policy GACN Genco GGFR GMP GSA GSAA GT
GTA GTLs GTS HSE IEA IFC IFI IMF IPP ISO Gas Aggregation Company of Nigeria
Generation company Global Gas Flaring Reduction Gas Master Plan Gas Sales
Agreement Gas Sales and Aggregation Agreement Gas Turbine Gas Transport
Agreement Gas to Liquids Gas Transmission System Health, Safety and Environment
International Energy Agency, Paris International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institution International Monetary Fund Independent
Power Producer International Standards Organisation Independent System Operator
Joint Venture Liquefied Natural Gas Liquefied Petroleum Gas Long Run Marginal
Cost Ministry, Department and/or Agency Memorandum of Understanding Mega Watts /
Mega Watt hours Metric Tonnes JV LNG LPG LRMC MDA MOU MW / MWh MT MYTO NAG
NAPIMS NBET NBP NCDMB NERC NG Multi-Year Tariff Order Non-Associated Gas
National Petroleum Investment Management Services Nigerian Bulk Electricity
Trading Plc National Balancing Point Nigeria Content Development Management
Board Nigerian Electricity Regulatory Commission Natural Gas NGMC NGPTC NGCC
NNPC Nigerian Gas Marketing Company Nigerian Gas Processing and Transportation
Company Nigerian Gas Cylinder Manufacturing Company Nigerian National Petroleum
Corporation NGL NGMC NGO NGV Natural Gas Liquid Nigeria Gas Management Company
Non-Government Organisation Natural Gas Vehicles Ministry of Petroleum Resources
10 Nigeria National Gas Policy NIS Nigeria Industrial Standards NLNG NLPGA
Nigeria Liquefied Natural Gas Nigeria Liquefied Petroleum Gas Association
Nigerian National Petroleum Company National Oil and Gas Company Nigerian
Planning Commission Nigerian Petroleum Development Company Limited Nigeria
Petroleum Marketing Company (formerly PPMC) Obiafu-Obrikom-Oben gas pipeline
Open Cycle Gas Turbine Offshore Gas Gathering System Olakola Liquefied Natural
Gas Project Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries Petroleum Industry
Bill Purchase Power Agreement Petroleum Products Marketing Company (now NPMC)
Public Private Partnership Petroleum Products Pricing Regulatory Authority
Partial Risk Guarantee Production Sharing Contract Petroleum Technology
Development Fund Presidential Task Force on Power NNPC NOC NPC NPDC NPMC OB3
OCGT OGGS OK LNG OPEC PIB PPA PPMC PPP PPPRA PRG PSC PTDF PTFP PTI Petroleum
Training Institute RE SCADA scf SON SPDC TCN TVET US / USA VAT Renewable Energy
Systematic Control And Data Acquisition standard cubic feet Standards
Organisation of Nigeria Shell Petroleum Development Company Transmission Company
of Nigeria Technical & Vocational and Educational & Training United States of
America Value Added Tax WAGP WAGPA WB WLPGA West African Gas Pipeline West
African Gas Pipeline Authority World Bank World Liquefied Gas Association
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 11 Nigeria National Gas Policy Units  / Bn bcf /
bcf/ / bcf/ bcm bcma bbl GW kg   MW / MW/ MM MMbtu MMscf MMscf/ Mscf mt mtpa scf
billion billion cubic feet / billion cubic feet per day / bcf per year billion
cubic metres billion cubic metres per year barrel Giga Watts kilogram million
thousand Mega Watts / Mega Watts hours million million British thermal units
million standard cubic feet million standard cubic feet per day thousand
standard cubic feet million metric tonnes million metric tonnes per year
standard cubic feet metric tonne Currencies  / NGN £ € $ / US$ / USD ¥ Yuan
Naira Pounds Sterling Euro United States Dollar Ministry of Petroleum Resources
12 Nigeria National Gas Policy  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Statement of Gas Policy This
policy document builds on the policy goals of the Federal Government for the gas
sector as presented in the  Big Wins initiative ( developed by the Ministry of
Petroleum Resources and the National Economic Recovery & Growth Plan (ERGP 2017
– 2020) The Policy articulates the vision of the Federal Government of Nigeria,
sets goals, strategies and an implementation plan for the introduction of an
appropriate institutional, legal, regulatory and commercial framework for the
gas sector It is intended to remove the barriers affecting investment and
development of the sector The policy will be reviewed and updated periodically
to ensure consistency in Government policy objectives at all times Government
shall abide by the provisions of this policy unless and until reviewed or
replaced by  formal restatement of policy duly gazetted by the Government
Background –  Much More Constrained International Business Environment For
approximately ten years until around 2014, Nigeria was exposed to  very benign
international environment, with high gas prices, strong global demand for gas
and LNG, and large flows of investment looking for opportunities in emerging
markets for gas based industrialisation (such as petrochemicals, methanol,
fertilisers) Those benign times have now passed and the international business
environment is now much tougher International gas prices have fallen, huge new
volumes of gas and LNG supplies are coming on stream globally, against reduced
forecasts of market demand growth Meanwhile, global investment flows are leaving
emerging markets Even within Africa, Nigeria is competing for investment with
Southern and Eastern Africa Background – Gas Master Plan This gas policy is
based on  fundamental review of the policy positions of the Government over the
last ten years in respect of Nigeria’ gas resources The previous policy
positions emanated from the Gas Master Plan (GMP), which was designed to ensure
the development of  full blown domestic market by However, the Plan has not
delivered on all its set targets For example, Nigeria still lacks critical gas
infrastructure and continues to fall short of Domestic Gas Supply Obligations
Nigeria is experiencing  full-blown energy crisis in spite of its abundant gas
resources  new gas policy that is more effective and adjusted for the much
harsher international business environment for gas is required to drive the
reforms necessary to attract investment into the sector Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 13 Nigeria National Gas Policy Vision: “To be an attractive gas-based
industrial nation, giving primary attention to meeting local gas demand
requirements, and developing  significant presence in international markets”
Mission: “To move Nigeria from  crude oil export-based economy to an attractive
oil and gas-based industrial economy” The gas policy intends to move Nigeria
from an oil-based to an oil and gas-based industrial economy This gas-based
industrialisation will be driven by some CORE PRINCIPLES: • Separate the
respective roles and responsibilities of government and the private sector; •
Establish  single independent petroleum regulatory authority; • • Implement full
legal separation of the upstream from the midstream; Implement full legal
separation of gas infrastructure ownership and operations from gas trading; •
Realise more of the LNG international downstream value; • Pursue  project-based,
rather than  centrally-planned domestic gas development approach; • Make  strong
maintenance and safety culture  priority; • Implement international best
practice for environmental protection; • Establish strong linkages with electric
power, agriculture, transport and industrial sectors; • Establish payment
discipline throughout the energy chain; • Honour stability of contract terms; •
Ensure security of assets; • Ensure compliance with the Nigerian Content Act The
main aspects of the gas policy now cover:  Governance (Legislation and
Regulation):  Single independent petroleum regulatory authority;  Emphasis on
petroleum safety compliance;  Full legal separation of the upstream from the
midstream;  Full legal separation of gas infrastructure ownership and operations
from gas trading;  Introduction of  relevant gas network code;  Pricing:
Upstream gas price set by netback from export parity price during transitional
period; ii Market-led wholesale gas pricing after the transitional period; iii
Triggers for announcement of competitive wholesale market; iv LNG export tolling
price;  Cost benchmarking for infrastructure facilities;  Fiscal framework which
recognises gas as  stand-alone commodity and industry separate from oil Ministry
of Petroleum Resources 14 Nigeria National Gas Policy  Industry Structure:
Mixed public-private participation, with  clear separation of roles between
government and the private sector;  Restructuring of NGC into separate transport
and gas marketing companies;  Strategic partnerships to support operations, in
particular, for NGPTC;  Greater involvement in marketing Government–owned equity
gas in international markets;  Move towards wholesale market competition;
review of gas aggregation policy and the future role of the Gas Implementation
of Domestic Gas Supply Obligations; Aggregation Company of Nigeria  Developing
Gas Resources:  Enable an environment that encourages exploration specifically
targeting gas;  Encourage exploration and development of new gas supply sources
from the inland and offshore basins;  Develop portfolio management methodologies
to prioritise low-cost gas development;  Clarify gas terms for PSCs;  Achieve
gas flare-out through gas utilisation projects utilising mature flare reduction
technologies;  Produce  Gas Resource Management Plan  Infrastructure:  Identify
and proceed with the development of key gas infrastructure;  Liberalise access
to offshore and onshore gas transmission infrastructure and gas processing
Building Gas Markets:  Continue gas exports consistent with domestic gas market
development;  Identify and promote domestic gas market development projects;
Gain more value from international downstream LNG markets;  Pursue  project-
based and market-opportunity approach, rather than centrally-planned national
model;  Identify and develop clusters for gas resource, infrastructure and gas-
based industrialisation;  Develop and implement  gas-for-development programme,
encouraging gas for smaller-scale projects;  Take steps to ensure rapid growth
of the LPG market, including reviewing effectiveness of NPMC as  market
leader/maker;  Investigate, develop and gain access to regional African gas
markets;  Set  suitable environment for financing of gas projects  Developing
National Human Resources:  Develop Nigerian content and implement Nigerian
Content Act;  Build institutional capacity;  Introduce  maintenance and safety
culture Ministry of Petroleum Resources 15 Nigeria National Gas Policy
Communications: Internal and external communications strategy;  Roadmap and
Action Plan:  Action plan for short term (months);  Implementation Plan for
medium term (- years);  Implementation Plan for long term (over two years)
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 16 Nigeria National Gas Policy  INTRODUCTION
Statement of the Gas Policy This policy document builds on the policy goals of
the Federal Government for the gas sector as presented in the  Big Wins
initiative ( developed by the Ministry of Petroleum Resources and the National
Economic Recovery & Growth Plan (ERGP 2017 – 2020) The Policy articulates the
vision of the Federal Government of Nigeria, sets goals, strategies and proposes
an implementation plan for the introduction of an appropriate institutional,
legal, regulatory and commercial framework for the gas sector It is intended to
remove the barriers affecting investment and development in the sector The
policy will be reviewed and updated periodically to ensure consistency in
Government policy objectives at all times Government shall abide by the
provisions of this policy unless and until reviewed or replaced by  formal
restatement of policy duly gazetted by the Government  Definition of Gas for the
Policy Although the definitions set out in this policy are indicative, the
policy is clear that the upstream, midstream and downstream segments will be
clearly separated Detailed definitions of gas and the parts of the value chain
will be set out in legislation distinguish Petroleum is defined to cover all
petroleum related products, including crude oil, petroleum products and other
derivatives of crude oil, natural gas, and various gas liquids and condensates
The complementary petroleum policy document concentrates on oil and oil products
while gas is covered by this Gas Policy document The parts of the gas value
chain, for the purposes of the Gas Policy, are defined as follows: Upstream:
Activities related to: • Exploration for, development and production of gas; •
Drilling and operation of gas producing wells; • Construction and operation of
gas gathering pipelines; • Gas separation and treatment facilities and
operations; • Transportation of personnel and equipment to and from upstream gas
locations and facilities Midstream: Activities related to: • Construction and
operation of gas transportation pipelines, in general after the flow station; •
Gas processing facilities; • Natural gas liquefaction plants; • Gas bulk storage
facilities; • Shipping of gas and related products; Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 17 Nigeria National Gas Policy • Other bulk transport methods, such as
rail, barge and trucks for transporting gas and related products on  wholesale
basis Downstream: Activities related to: • Construction and operation of
facilities for distributing gas to customers; • Retail stations for CNG; • City
gate reception terminals for gas; • Distribution of gas; • Wholesale marketing
of gas and gas products; • Marketing, retailing and sale of gas The reasons for
the clear separation of the segments of the gas value chain are: • For fiscal
reasons (dealt with in the complementary Petroleum Fiscal Policy); • To enable
market entry and access for new entrants and investors  clear separation and
distinction between the upstream and the midstream will provide  level playing
field between incumbents and new entrants, ensure clarity in midstream
regulation, and will provide  basis for ending the practice of consolidation of
midstream costs against upstream tax liabilities  Background Nigeria –  Gas Play
and not an Oil Play The most dominant natural resource in Nigeria is natural gas
With proven gas reserves of 188 trillion cubic feet (tcf) of gas and the 9th
largest gas reserves in the world, Nigeria has more gas reserves than oil Figure
: World Proved Gas Reserves Ranking (2015) World Proved Gas Reserves Ranking,
(Trillion cubic feet), 2015 Indonesia, % Norway, % Egypt, % Kuwait, % Libya, %
India, % Canada, % Australia, % Iraq, % China, % )    ( Algeria, % Iran, %
Nigeria, %            Venezuela, % United Arab Emirates, % Russian Federation, %
Saudi Arabia, % US, %        Turkmenistan, % Qatar, % - Countries Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 18 Nigeria National Gas Policy Source: BP Statistical Review
of World Energy, 2016 Though Nigeria can be regarded as  gas province with some
oil in it, little effort has been made to undertake exploration for gas As
result,  significant proportion of Nigeria’ gas was discovered incidentally
during exploration for oil In 2015, gas production was just 29% of oil
production and reserves production ratios were 46 years for oil against 102
years for gas (reserves production ratio is  measure of how strenuously reserves
are being exploited) Table : Nigerian Gas Production and Utilisation () Year
Domestic Gas Sales (bscf) Sales to NLNG (bscf) Total Gas Flared (bscf) Gas
Production (bscf) Total Gas Utilisation (bscf) Others (bscf) 2006 ,290 326 558
585 ,469 820 2007 ,607 280 844 667 ,790 817 2008 ,580 232 969 709 ,910 671 2009
,228 237 641 815 ,692 536 2010 ,820 286 992 997 ,275 545 2011 ,967 345 ,115 ,003
,463 504 2012 ,996 372 ,131 ,028 ,531 465 2013 ,812 391 965 ,027 ,384 428 2014
,049 425 ,124 ,107 ,669 379 2015 Source: DPR, Annual Oil & Gas Report 2014;
Analysis: MPR Gas Policy Team 2016 Others: Fuel, Gas lift, Reinjection, NGLs;
Note: Gas Production is total production 445 ,161 ,672 ,066 ,003 331 Prior to
2014 and barring 2009, Nigeria was exposed to  very benign international
environment, with high gas prices, strong global demand for gas and LNG, and
large flows of investment looking for opportunities in emerging markets for gas-
based industrialisation (such as petrochemicals, methanol, fertilisers) Those
benign times have now passed and the international business environment is now
much tougher International gas prices have fallen, and huge new volumes of gas
and LNG supplies are coming on-stream globally against reduced forecasts of
market demand growth Nigeria will struggle to compete with the large gas supply
volumes about to enter the East Asian markets North America is closed as  gas
importer European gas demand is depressed and may remain so in the future as the
continent increasingly turns to renewable energy South American gas markets are
growing but are relatively small and LNG supplies are currently dominated by
Trinidad & Tobago Meanwhile, global investment flows have moved away from
emerging markets and back to developed economies Even within Africa, Nigeria is
competing for investment with Southern and Eastern Africa Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 19 Nigeria National Gas Policy Nigeria now needs to work hard to
survive in the constrained economic environment the country now finds itself in
From 2008 to 2015 the policy of the Government was to harness Nigeria’ vast gas
resources based on the GMP, which outlined the objectives and aspirations of the
Nation with respect to its gas resources However, with minimal investments made
in the gas sector over the period, the Plan has not delivered on all its set
targets For example, Nigeria still lacks critical gas infrastructure and
continues to fall short of domestic gas supply obligations Objectives of
Government The Federal Government has historically invested more in and derived
greater revenue from oil rather than gas It is however recognised that the
natural linkages of the gas sector to the electricity, industrial, agricultural
and transportation sectors present the single most important opportunity for
rapidly accelerating the nation’ industrial development and economic recovery
Government will leverage its large gas portfolio to ensure that gas development
is undertaken in accordance with Nigeria’ national socio-economic development
priorities Gas Legislation The existing petroleum legislation (Petroleum Act of
1969, Cap 10 LFN 2004) was enacted more for oil with inadequate provisions for
gas as  hydrocarbon and an industry in its own right It also did not provide for
the development of  midstream and downstream gas industry  Downstream Gas Bill
was drafted in 2005 and was subsequently incorporated into the Petroleum
Industry Bill (PIB) The main thrust of the Downstream Gas Bill and the gas
provisions of the PIB was to develop  regulatory and commercial framework to
support the growth of  downstream domestic gas market Gas Master Plan In 2008
the Federal Government of Nigeria approved the implementation of the GMP The GMP
acknowledged that there was  strategic window of opportunity for Nigeria to
establish itself as  major LNG exporting nation and for gas-based
industrialisation The GMP emphasised the following:  The Infrastructure
Blueprint The Infrastructure Blueprint was the heart of the GMP It mapped out
the planned infrastructure needed, including connecting the gas networks in the
western and eastern parts of the country, building new transport pipelines from
the south to Ajaokuta Steel, on to Abuja and then to the northernmost reaches of
the country The first part of the infrastructure required the construction of
Central Processing Facilities (CPFs) in the Niger Delta region to process wet
gas for supply to onshore gas transportation networks and industrial plants
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 20 Nigeria National Gas Policy Almost 590km of
pipelines have been completed and commissioned further to the GMP These
pipelines include: • Oben-Geregu (196km) • Expansion of Escravos-Warri-Oben
(110km) • Emuren-Itoki (50km) • Itoki-Olorunshogo (31km) Imo River-Alaoji (24km)
• • Ukanafun-Calabar (128km) • NOPL (50km) With these projects now in place, all
available power plants in the country today are connected to permanent gas
supply pipelines In addition, there is ongoing construction of the strategic
East-West OB3 pipeline (127km) scheduled for completion by the end of 2017 and
the expansion of the Escravos-Lagos Gas Pipeline System scheduled for completion
by Q1 The technical evaluation for the Trans Nigeria Gas Pipeline (1400km) has
also been completed II Domestic Gas Supply Obligation (DSO)  Domestic Gas Supply
Obligation (DSO) was introduced to address challenges in gas supply into the
domestic market and provide  pricing path for wholesale gas supply to downstream
offtakers The DSO was to be broken down to an annual delivery obligation (,
delivery to the nearest gas transmission infrastructure) on all gas producers,
with the sum of all obligations equalling the planned domestic requirement for
gas III Commercial Framework (Pricing Policy) The National Domestic Gas Supply &
Pricing Regulations was issued in 2008, proposing different prices for different
consumer groups All suppliers were to be paid an Aggregate Domestic Gas Price
Strategic Aggregator (Gas Aggregation Company of Nigeria, GACN) was then
established to manage the implementation of the DSO and the aggregate price
Results from the Previous Policy While the gas market has grown over the last
ten years, it has been very slow, at %  year, only just keeping up with national
population growth (% according to the World Bank) In other words, gas supply per
head has barely changed over the last ten years and has not met economic growth
needs Nigeria is now experiencing  full-blown energy crisis in spite of its
abundant gas resources  new gas policy that is more effective and adjusted for
the much harsher international business environment for gas is now required to
drive the institutional reforms and regulatory changes necessary to attract
investment into the sector Ministry of Petroleum Resources 21 Nigeria National
Gas Policy International Perspectives Oil and Gas Price Movements There are two
key messages:  The Period of High Prices Now Over Global Oil and Gas prices for
the ten years preceding 2016 have been the highest they have ever been since the
1860s when the modern petroleum industry first started Price levels have now
fallen substantially from those levels and there is  possibility that they may
not reach those levels again As oil supply reduces, there may be  window of oil
prices of around $85/bbl in the period 2020-Prices are forecast to fall again
after that window and then stay low At the same time, while oil supply increases
dramatically as US shale oil comes back onstream, demand growth will markedly
soften, except for the petrochemicals sector which is likely to be the main
market for oil These oil price movements will affect gas prices as well The
clear message for Nigeria is that it must broaden the economy beyond oil ii
Recent Extreme Price Volatility There has also been extreme volatility of oil
and gas prices since around 2005, at levels not seen since the 1860s Meanwhile,
Japanese prices were affected by two factors: ) the linkage to oil prices led
gas prices to rise as oil prices rose; and ) the closure of Japanese nuclear
plants following Fukushima led to increased Japanese demand for gas But as oil
prices fell, the opposite effect happened Japanese gas prices came close to
parity with European gas prices (UK National Balancing Point, NBP and German
import prices) in May 2015, and on  couple of occasions, actually fell below the
European levels Price differentials between Japanese and European gas prices
have now reverted to their traditional approximately one third premium Table :
Monthly Gas Price Movements at Major Pricing Points () (January 2015 – September
2016) Dates Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Price ($/MMbtu) Japan LNG CIF Price
($/MMbtu) Europe Gas Import Border Price ($/MMbtu) 25 27 27 42 27 German Natural
Gas Spot Price ($/MMbtu)  29 29 39 37 Jan-2015 Feb-2015 Mar-2015 Apr-2015
May-2015 97 85 80 58 84 12 37 28 22 72 Ministry of Petroleum Resources 22
Nigeria National Gas Policy Dates Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Price ($/MMbtu)
Japan LNG CIF Price ($/MMbtu) German Natural Gas Spot Price ($/MMbtu)  68 66 49
01 87 81 09 79 09 02 99 Europe Gas Import Border Price ($/MMbtu) 29 93 95 71 43
24 10 35 90 26 13 04 13 51 47 21 Jun-2015 Jul-2015 Aug-2015 Sep-2015 Oct-2015
Nov-2015 Dec-2015 Jan-2016 Feb-2016 Mar-2016 Apr-2016 May-2016 Jun-2016 Jul-2016
Aug-2016 Sep-2016 77 83 76 65 32 08 92 27 96 70 90 92 57 79 79 97 59 87 18 64 44
89 50 85 01 23 38 86 99 32 60 60 Source: US EIA 2016; IMF 2016; World Bank
Commodity Markets Review Report 2016; Analysis: MPR Gas Policy Team 2016 Price
Risk of China Shale Gas  major threat and perhaps the biggest price risk to LNG
and international gas prices over the long run could be if shale gas is
developed in China Beyond the potential for shale gas production from China’
Tarim basin, the possibility of China ceasing to become  gas importer at the
same time as massive new supplies of LNG in the Pacific basin come on line
(within the next five to ten years) would probably lead to dramatic falls in LNG
prices across the world, with prices staying low for  very long time LNG Trade
Flows This chart shows global LNG and pipeline gas flows Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 23 Nigeria National Gas Policy Figure : Major Global LNG and Pipeline
Gas Flows, 2015 Source: BP Statistical Review of World Energy, 2016 The
following chart shows Nigerian LNG trade flows Figure : Nigerian LNG Trade
Flows, 2015 Source: Data: BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2016; Analysis:
MPR Gas Policy Team 2016 Atlantic and Pacific Basins In LNG terms, the world is
basically in two basins, Atlantic and Pacific, with Africa dividing the two The
two basins operate differently, with different suppliers and markets, and
different contractual terms Due to LNG boil off over time as well as freight and
insurance costs, LNG from one basin is generally uncompetitive in the other
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 24 Nigeria National Gas Policy Figure :
Mountain of New Supplies over the Next  years1 Asia Pacific was the major market
for Nigeria LNG in But with two major exporters (Qatar and Australia) and the
huge new volumes about to supply the same region, Nigerian LNG will probably
struggle for market penetration in the future Nigeria is naturally an Atlantic
basin supplier There certainly have been and will continue to be Nigerian LNG
deliveries to Pacific basin markets but they are unlikely to be major markets
for Nigeria, as there are actual and potential major LNG producers
geographically closer to East Asian markets (including Qatar, Abu Dhabi,
Tanzania, Mozambique, Indonesia, Malaysia, Australia and so on) Pacific Basin
Australia: Australia currently is the second largest exporter of LNG and is
expected to overtake Qatar as the world’ largest exporter when seven LNG
totalling mtpa, projects which are currently under construction are commissioned
between 2016 and They are expected to enter the Asia pacific market, which
currently takes all of Australia’ LNG exports These volumes of LNG are more than
twice the total volume of Nigeria’ LNG export or liquefaction capacity
Mozambique: Mozambique has emerged as the second largest gas reserves holder in
Africa following offshore discoveries made since It is aggressively developing
plans to commercialise its gas resource Development of four LNG trains is
ongoing with future plans for up to ten trains Tanzania: Tanzania has also made
some considerable offshore gas discoveries, with contingent resources estimated
at 29 tcf and possible resources up to 50 tcf In the medium term, BG and Statoil
are developing two LNG trains, with plans to increase to four trains in the long
term  Source: Howard Rogers, 2015 Ministry of Petroleum Resources 25 Nigeria
National Gas Policy Mozambique and Tanzania are both developing the same Rovuma
basin which crosses the border between the two countries Mozambique and Tanzania
each pose considerable competition for Nigerian LNG for Asian markets (East
Asia, South Asia and the Middle East), even more so when both schemes are
considered together Papua New Guinea: Papua New Guinea joined the league of LNG
exporting countries by bringing in LNG supply from Yemen (another LNG exporting
nation) The Papua New Guinea LNG project has been exporting LNG to Southeast
Asia since 2014, producing  mtpa from 2015, with an estimated production of more
than  tcf of gas over the project lifetime Indonesia: Indonesia is cutting down
on its gas export obligations as  result of attempts to meet domestic energy
demand SKK Migas, the country’ upstream oil and gas regulator, has said that
domestic commitments and consumption will continue to grow, which means an
increasing gas allocation for domestic use and reducing volumes of gas available
for export Malaysia: While Indonesia is cutting down on LNG exports, Malaysia is
still aggressively committed to increasing its LNG supplies for domestic markets
(coastal regions and islands) and exports Malaysia is the fourth largest natural
gas reserves holder in the Asia-Pacific region, and accounts for 10% of total
world LNG exports Japan Methane Hydrates: The Japanese government has succeeded
in extracting samples of  next-generation resource, methane hydrate, from the
bottom of the Sea of Japan It is estimated that there is enough methane hydrate
beneath coastal waters to meet the nation’ natural gas needs for 100 years This
is  long-term prospect, however, as the technology to extract methane hydrate is
far from commercialisation There are also concerns about environmental damage
linked to extraction, partially because methane is  powerful greenhouse gas
Figure : LNG and Gas Flows to Asia, 2015 Source: Data: BP Statistical Review of
World Energy 2016; Analysis: MPR Gas Policy Team 2016 With such huge streams of
LNG and pipeline gas coming into the market over the next few years to the Asian
region, the oversupply will continue to bring pressures on LNG Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 26 Nigeria National Gas Policy and gas prices, and suppliers
will have to settle for buyers’ conditions in changing contract agreements (with
probably  continuing move towards ever shorter contract terms) In addition,
buyers’ cartel may build up among Asian LNG buyers, further complicated by the
emergence of Singapore as an LNG hub Because of its distance from the market,
Nigerian LNG will struggle to be competitive in Asian LNG markets in the future
Atlantic Basin Nigerian LNG markets realistically lie in the Atlantic basin, to
North America, South America and Europe All of these however present challenges
to Nigeria North America: Since the shale gas revolution, North America is no
longer  market for LNG, as it has become self-sufficient in gas, and has become
an LNG exporter South America: South America has growing gas markets and can be
market for Nigerian LNG, particularly to Brazil and Argentina Supplies from
Nigeria are at  similar distance from Atlantic Coast and South American markets
as are supplies from Trinidad & Tobago which currently provides most of the LNG
supply to South America Nigeria would have to play catch-up to be able to access
those markets While South American LNG markets are growing, they are still
probably not large enough to be able to accommodate significant LNG supplies
from both Nigeria and Trinidad & Tobago Trinidad & Tobago has  declining
resource base however and is finding it harder to fulfil its supply obligations
Figure : LNG and Gas Flows to South America, 2015 Source: Data: BP Statistical
Review of World Energy 2016; Analysis: MPR Gas Policy Team 2016 Europe Gas
demand in Europe remains lower than forecast when NLNG Trains - were
commissioned There are several factors supporting the view that European gas
demand may stay low for the foreseeable future Ministry of Petroleum Resources
27 Nigeria National Gas Policy One is the state of the Eurozone economies Eight
years after the financial crisis, southern European economic growth remains low
(while northern European economies are growing strongly) Europe (southern Europe
at least) may be entering  period similar to what was called “the lost decade”
in Japan, where despite many government fiscal stimuli, the economy remained
stagnant The short and possibly medium term uncertainty surrounding Brexit will
only exacerbate European economic growth concerns Northern European economies,
which are growing well, have abundant gas supplies Even though the UK has turned
from being  net gas exporter to now being  (small) net gas importer, there are
abundant gas supplies in Norway, with pipeline supplies across the North Sea,
and indeed Norwegian LNG exports (in particular the Snøvit field LNG
liquefaction offshore northern Norway); and nearby in Russia (with Shtockman LNG
in the Barents Sea off northern Russia) There are other LNG markets in the
periphery of Europe, such as Turkey, which has received some Nigerian LNG
supplies, or Egypt, which has also turned from being  gas exporter to  gas
importer Gas markets in the Eastern Mediterranean are likely to be small,
however, as gas resources are also being developed in the region Figure : LNG
and Gas Flows to Europe, 2015 Source: Data: BP Statistical Review of World
Energy 2016; Analysis: MPR Gas Policy Team 2016 Power Generation in Europe
Another threat potentially reducing LNG demand in Europe is the drive towards
renewable energy Europe has turned  corner where renewable energy has now become
mainstream across Europe Europe is reducing its reliance on thermal energy of
all sorts The growth in electricity generated from renewable sources during the
period 2003 to 2013 largely reflects an expansion of wind turbines, solar power
and biomass, although hydropower remained the single largest source for
renewable electricity generated in the EU-Ministry of Petroleum Resources 28
Nigeria National Gas Policy Other Factors Supporting Gas in Europe Two general
trends across Western Europe are the decommissioning of ageing coal plants and
the move away from nuclear power Germany has taken  policy to move away
completely from nuclear power The UK and France are committed to continuing
nuclear power generation but both countries are encountering technical and
financial problems The result is that there is likely to be  continuing role for
gas for power generation in Europe, to replace coal generation and to take up
the slack that new nuclear power will not be able to meet Commoditisation of LNG
Costs of LNG liquefaction, shipping and regasification in particular have been
falling steadily over the years LNG used to be differentiated as  high-priced
product in Europe; however, LNG is now rapidly becoming  commodity which can be
sold all year round into European markets (provided the price is low enough) but
it may be losing its winter pricing premium Another important trend is that the
long term contract of twenty, thirty or even forty years is giving way to
shorter contract periods of five years or less The commodity nature of LNG will
be plain to see if LNG spot trades become common Potential African Gas Markets
Perhaps Nigeria could help develop and then supply African gas markets with LNG
and pipeline gas The West African Gas Pipeline (WAGP) could be extended further
west to neighbouring countries; gas pipeline connections could perhaps be made
to Cameroon (although Cameroon has its own domestic gas reserves which are right
next to the main industrial markets); or Nigerian LNG could be taken to other
markets along the west African coast While these developments are all possible,
the window of opportunity is limited because:  Gas export projects take
considerable time to develop;  Countries with potential markets such as Cote
’Iviore are beginning to contract LNG form other supply sources;  Africa may
decide to skip the fossil fuel stage as Africa develops, and go straight to mass
renewable power generation along the lines of Europe Investment Flows Global
Investment Flows From 2008, the developed economies suffered and investments
into western markets fell dramatically After  small initial fall, from 2009,
investment flows to emerging markets increased strongly, until around As
developed economies recover, investment flows to emerging markets are now flat
or slightly declining, while the major investment flows are returning to
developed western economies The growth period for investments into emerging
markets has now ended Ministry of Petroleum Resources 29 Nigeria National Gas
Policy Of emerging markets, most of the investment flows went to Asia and only
small proportion to Africa Within Africa, investment is now moving away from
Nigeria to more attractive opportunities in East Africa (Mozambique, Tanzania
and Kenya) and South Africa Investment Flows to Nigeria Investment flows into
Nigeria are declining and some existing investments are leaving the country for
more favourable investment destinations, such as Mozambique, Tanzania, Kenya,
and South Africa Nigeria' appeal has faded as the price of oil, the source of up
to 80% of export earnings, has declined Growth fell to % last year, the slowest
since 1999, and is forecast to slow again, to %, in 2016 (source: Morgan
Stanley) In US Dollar terms, the economy in 2019 will still be 17% smaller than
its 2014 peak of $542 bn In Conclusion: Nigeria has  Challenging Future In
conclusion, Nigeria faces some significant market challenges in the future for
its LNG exports It is likely that Nigerian LNG supplies will be able to find
markets, but price discounting will likely become the norm Nigeria will also
have to work much harder in the future to market its LNG  Challenges Facing
Nigeria Presently Nigeria is currently facing significant challenges The easy
days of past years, when the country enjoyed  very benign international
environment with high prices and growing markets, have passed These challenges
include: • International Environment:  Low and volatile gas price;  Low demand
for LNG;   Commoditisation of LNG;  Power shifting from producer to buyer;
Tipping point reached for renewable energy Increasing competition of supplies
into the global market; • Domestic Environment:  Security of supply risks:   Gas
supply restrictions for domestic gas projects; Challenges in funding of NNPC’
cash call obligations in upstream projects; Growing gas payment arrears in the
power sector; Militancy and insurgency    Absence of enabling environment to
attract foreign direct investment (FDI): Slow progress with Nigerian gas export
projects; Slow pace of domestic gas projects; Inadequate gas supply for the
domestic market; Ministry of Petroleum Resources 30 Nigeria National Gas Policy
Financing challenges from local financial institutions; Re-direction of FDI
focus from Nigeria to other regions; Slow implementation of key infrastructure
projects envisaged in the GMP  Governance: There is  vast gulf of understanding
between the private and public sectors (especially between government and the
IOCs); Need for increased transparency and adherence to due process in business
transactions; Conflicts of interest in Government as policy maker, legislator,
regulator and commercial participant; NNPC in transmission and wholesale gas
transactions  Legislation: Petroleum law designed for crude oil not for gas; Gas
not recognised as  commodity in its own right; Lack of coverage of downstream
gas in legislation; Laws scattered, sometimes overlapping and opaque
Regulation: Several regulatory agencies with overlapping roles, while other
roles are unregulated; Functionally weak agencies; Long and tortuous regulatory
processes; High transaction costs for investors  Sector structure: Natural
monopoly elements combined with potentially competitive elements; Potential for
competition constrained by existing sector structure; Conflicts of interest at
various points  Weaknesses in the wider supply chain and with skills
development: Too few people who are sufficiently qualified and skilled; An
inefficient supply value chain driving up costs and inhibiting investment
projects  The Need for  New Gas Policy Nigeria needs  new gas policy that fits
the severely constrained circumstances in which the nation now finds itself The
gas policy must work for Nigerians and must be faithfully implemented to meet
the vision outlined in this document Government will leverage its large gas
portfolio to ensure that gas development is undertaken in accordance with
Nigeria’ national socio-economic development priorities Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 31 Nigeria National Gas Policy  VISION AND OBJECTIVES  Vision “To be
an attractive gas-based industrial nation, giving primary attention local gas
demand requirements, and developing  significant presence in international
markets” to meeting This Vision for Nigerian gas contains key aspirations:  Move
the economy from oil to gas;  Diversify the gas supply options within Nigeria,
to ensure security of supply;  Extend gas penetration in the domestic market in
order to facilitate the growth of the electric power, agricultural, industrial
and transportation sectors;  Gain  presence for Nigerian gas in international
markets;  Operate  gas industry with  clear division of roles between private
and public sectors:  Public sector policy making; implementation and regulation;
Private sector investment and operations;  End gas flaring and address
environmental issues;  Provide an enabling environment for increased private
sector participation in the gas sector;  Clarify the rules guiding investment in
the gas sector  Mission “To move Nigeria from  crude oil export-based economy to
an attractive oil and gas-based industrial economy” Realisation of these lofty
objectives will depend on the successful implementation of the following:  Set
clear gas policies;  Establish  clear legal and regulatory framework;
Communicate the vision to government agencies, local and international
stakeholders;  Ensure security of gas supply through:  developing new gas supply
resources;  installing an optimal infrastructure network;  Provide an attractive
climate for investment;  Seek value addition in downstream high value
international and national markets;  Direct low-cost gas for domestic markets;
Realign the public sector to provide policy, legal and regulatory support to the
industry;  Introduce international best practice in operations and in
governance; Ministry of Petroleum Resources 32 Nigeria National Gas Policy
Ensure that operations are conducted in an environmentally clean manner
Strategic Objectives of the Gas Policy In order to meet the Vision and Mission,
strategic objectives of the gas policy have been defined as follows:
Communicate the vision and the gas policy internally and externally;  Identify
new gas resources, grow reserves and diversify gas supplies, from:  Niger Delta;
Offshore;  Inland basins;  Gas flare out;  Establish  clear policy,
institutional, legal and regulatory framework:  Gas policy;  Gas legislation;
Regulatory authority;  Secondary legislation (regulation);  Enable  conducive
environment for investors and for market growth:  Clear, consistent and investor
friendly legal and regulatory framework;   Support for the development of
supporting infrastructure;  Fiscal environment that supports investment and
domestic growth;  Willing investors provided with accelerated access to gas
resources; Investment promotion;  Discourage wasteful projects whilst
encouraging optimisation amongst resource owners; for example, through joint
development of gas discoveries and infrastructure among several licensees if
such developments would yield an economic project;  Seek value addition through:
Linkages to the power, industrial, agriculture, transportation and other
strategic sectors;  Gas based industrialisation;  Downstream high value export
markets;  Develop Nigerian human resources in the petroleum sector:
International training; Improved national petroleum education;    Development of
competency through education and practical experience, such as apprenticeship
schemes;  Graduate training;  Technical, Vocational, Educational Training
(TVET);  Implement international best practice in operations, particularly in
maintenance, health and safety; Ministry of Petroleum Resources 33 Nigeria
National Gas Policy Implement good governance throughout the industry: Cluster
development of gas infrastructure  Strategic Elements of the Gas Policy These
objectives as described above are now described in detail through the rest of
this gas policy document The objectives are addressed under each of several
policy areas or themes:  Governance;  Industry Structure;  Developing Gas
Resources;  Infrastructure;  Building Gas Markets;  Developing National Human
Resources;  Communications;  Roadmap and Action Plan In order to achieve the
successful achievement of the strategic objectives and the elements, the
Ministry of Petroleum Resources will work with the National Assembly, States,
other Federal MDAs such as the Ministries of Power, Environment, Finance,
Investment, Budget & National planning, Agriculture, Transportation, and Justice
and the CBN Industry, Trade & Ministry of Petroleum Resources 34 Nigeria
National Gas Policy  GOVERNANCE  Strategic Objectives of the Legal and
Regulatory Framework The main Petroleum Industry legislation in Nigeria, the
Petroleum Act, Cap 10 LFN 2004, did not legislate for gas as  hydrocarbon and
industry in its own right, nor for  midstream and downstream gas industry This
has posed  challenge to the development of the gas sector and the attainment of
national aspirations for gas- based industrialisation The government will pass
new legislation to address gas issues, remove the anomalies and distinguish the
up, mid and downstream The main aspects to be addressed under  new legislation
on gas shall reflect: • Emphasis on gas as  fuel in its own right, rather than
by-product of oil production; • Separation of upstream from the midstream; •
Greater focus on the development of the midstream and downstream segments; •
Separation of gas infrastructure ownership and operations from gas trading; •
Pricing; • Competition regulation; • Fiscal regime; • Licensing of different
activities in the gas chain:  Exploration;  Production;  Wholesale gas supply;
Gas processing;  Gas Storage  Gas transportation;  Gas network operation;  Gas
distribution;  Retail trading of gas  Institutional Framework Background The
thrust of the policy is to introduce institutional reforms capable of
translating aspirations into results Currently, the existing policy and
regulatory institutions overseeing the oil and gas industry in Nigeria are: •
Ministry of Petroleum Resources; • Department of Petroleum Resources; • Nigeria
Content Development and Monitoring Board • Petroleum Products Pricing Regulatory
Agency; • Petroleum Equalisation Fund Ministry of Petroleum Resources 35 Nigeria
National Gas Policy Institutional Capacity Strengthening The Federal Government
is determined to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Petroleum Resources
as  policy making institution Towards these objectives, the policy making and
surveillance capability of the Ministry of Petroleum Resources will be
strengthened, new technical resources will be introduced, existing departments
will be restructured, and additional mandates would be assigned Scope of
Regulation  simplified licensing regime will be introduced for every activity,
including but not limited to constructing and operating gas processing plants,
liquefaction plants, gas transportation network operation, transportation
pipelines, storage distribution networks; wholesale gas supply; and retail
trading of gas facilities, Single Independent Petroleum Regulatory Authority The
government is desirous of reducing the current regulatory overlaps and
consolidating the existing regulatory authorities into  single petroleum
regulatory authority The Federal Government is determined that there should be
new single independent regulatory authority for the petroleum sector in Nigeria,
which will replace the existing regulatory agencies The new regulatory authority
will cover the whole petroleum sector, incorporate the activities of the
existing petroleum regulatory authorities and also cover some new regulatory
activities not currently covered It will essentially be responsible for the
economic and technical regulation of the gas sector and shall have licensing,
investigative, monitoring and dispute mediation powers The following Divisions,
Departments or functions are envisaged to form parts of the new petroleum
regulatory authority, among others:  Upstream oil and gas regulation;  Midstream
and downstream gas regulation;  Midstream and downstream oil regulation;
Health, safety and environment compliance;  Consumer protection;  Compliance
monitoring The government is aware that while there are many benefits in
consolidating into  single petroleum regulatory authority (and reducing the
current number of disparate and sometime overlapping regulatory agencies), there
are also some challenges The main challenge is likely to be in transitioning the
current agencies into  cohesive new regulatory institution This will require
building institutional capacity and  strong and effective corporate culture
within the new institutions, to ensure effectiveness of the institutional
framework and sustainability of the policy Ministry of Petroleum Resources 36
Nigeria National Gas Policy Petroleum Safety Compliance The current system in
Nigeria regarding maintenance, health, safety and environment in the Petroleum
Sector needs to be brought to  higher standard Major safety incidents go without
proper investigation and without responsible parties being held sufficiently
accountable This policy places emphasis on prevention and conclusive
investigation as well as appropriate sanctions • Lessons should be learned,
changes made and similar incidents avoided in the future; • If individuals are
culpable, they should face criminal prosecution, setting  deterrent to people
The safety record for gas and LPG in Nigeria is unlikely to significantly
improve without establishing and empowering the regulator to carry out forensic
investigations and to lay criminal prosecutions where necessary  strong robust
safety regulator will be established, with powers of inspection and
investigation, and working with law enforcement agencies as necessary for entry
into premises without owner’ permission, removal of evidence, questioning under
caution and detention, in accordance with the law The policy is for safety
regulations to include robust penalties for breaches of regulations and safety
standards There also needs to be criminal prosecution for instances of gross
negligence or wilful misconduct that lead to  serious breach of health and
safety standards or serious incidents that lead to loss of life They should
carry  potential jail sentence for Directors of offending companies  key safety
regulatory function therefore is the monitoring and inspections regime
Inspections: Preventive monitoring and inspections to ensure licensees are
acting within regulation (before-the-incident prevention, ex-ante); •
Investigations: Major incident investigations, where forensic investigations of
incidents take place (after-the-incident investigations, ex-post), gathering
evidence so that:  lessons can be learned for the future; and  criminal
prosecutions can be made, if necessary in instances of gross negligence or
wilful misconduct The petroleum safety division of the new regulator will be
dedicated to the safety regulation of all operations in the petroleum sector
However, it is recognised that such an organisation needs to be properly
financed and needs to have specialist staff with the skills and the tools to
carry out their work effectively Ministry of Petroleum Resources 37 Nigeria
National Gas Policy Technical Standards Around the world, technical standards
are usually developed by the industry in consultation Standards are produced by
technical standards committees of the Industry association which are made up of
representatives of the industry Nigeria will adopt appropriate international
standards selected, whichever is more stringent, from ISO, ASME, EI, API, ASTM,
ANSI, for example Pipeline design standards can be from, for example: ISO, ASME,
EI, API, IGEM The new petroleum regulatory authority will be responsible for
technical standards in Nigeria The Standards Division of the Petroleum
Regulatory Authority will be responsible for developing and maintaining
technical standards, working with industry Metering and Measurement The state of
metering and measurement of hydrocarbons is not satisfactory As part of
arrangements for  transparently run industry, the policy is that shortcomings in
metering, measurement and fiscalisation of hydrocarbons throughout the value
chain will be addressed Cost Monitoring and Control The costs of running the
overall petroleum industry in Nigeria have risen dramatically to an unacceptable
level Nigeria has become one of the highest cost provinces in the world The
intention of the policy is to avoid duplication of and unnecessary costs, and to
avoid redundant and underutilised assets It is the policy of the Government that
robust cost estimation and cost control must be adopted as  standard operating
practice in the sector The petroleum regulator in implementing the intention of
the policy will approve  duplication of infrastructure assets only if an
economic case can be put forward Measures to reduce costs in the Nigerian gas
industry should include (among other measures): • Cost estimates prepared for
any project must be benchmarked across the industry and with peer projects
globally • An evaluation of the technical and economic feasibility of any
engineering project must be undertaken before proceeding with such project •
Approved cost data for all projects should be recorded in the National Cost
Database developed under the leadership of the Commission • Cost optimisation
and efficiency of operations through joint developments, consolidation of
contracts where necessary and better asset management; • Performance-based
incentives that reward lower cost producers and penalise higher cost producers;
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 38 Nigeria National Gas Policy •  general move
away from higher cost gas; • Sharing of services and facilities; • Contract
thresholds for projects The government is also very aware of the measures it
needs to take to help to produce  lower cost environment, including among
others: • Resolving the Niger Delta militancy issues; • Reducing the general
costs of doing business in Nigeria; • • Optimising contracting cycles
Introducing efficiencies into local content contractor procurement; Consumer
Protection  consumer representation and protection body will be established,
with the mandate of representing mainly residential and small business consumers
against more powerful corporate or government interests The regulator shall
prescribe and communicate  consumer protection standard for the gas sector
National Petroleum Policy Directorate For sustainability and effective
monitoring and implementation of policy, specialist centres shall be established
within the MPR, in addition to the existing technical departments To ensure
more effective role,  National Petroleum Policy Directorate, which will act as
technical back office of the Minister in his policy making role, will be
established within the MPR along with the following specialist centres:  Oil
Policy Division with departments for the Upstream, Midstream and Downstream;
Gas Policy Division with departments for the Upstream, Midstream and Downstream;
Strategic Planning and Policy Research Centre;  The Investment Promotion Office
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 39 Nigeria National Gas Policy Figure : National
Petroleum Policy Directorate Source: MPR Petroleum Policy Team 2016 Strategic
Planning and Policy Research Centre The Strategic Planning and Policy Research
Centre shall keep regular track of local and international developments and keep
Ministry, Regulator and other government institutions updated as necessary The
Strategic Planning and Policy Research Centre will be  small research centre
responsible for tracking developments such as: • Strategic planning and natural
resource management issues; • Petroleum industry market developments; • Oil and
gas price movements and forecasts; • Policy initiatives; • Regulatory
initiatives; • Developments in international energy organisations; • Key
international contacts with whom leaders within the MPR need to keep in contact
Investment Promotion Office It will be useful and helpful to investors to have
single point of first contact where they can find out about Nigeria and about
the investment opportunities in the petroleum sector Any potential investor
should be given as much information as possible, in as investor friendly  manner
as possible, about all the opportunities While it is not possible to give
confidential information about competitors or other companies, the Ministry
should be able to produce authoritative estimates of reserves, of markets, of
opportunities for investment, of legal and fiscal conditions, and any other
information that can be provided Ministry of Petroleum Resources 40 Nigeria
National Gas Policy The Investment Promotion Office will provide: • Technical
support in promoting  project; •  centre of expertise on upstream and downstream
petroleum opportunities within Nigeria that will work with the Nigeria
Investment Promotion Council (NIPC); •  database of projects and investment
opportunities; • An informative website; • Support with promotions and
roadshows; • Dedicated personnel to help potential investors, so that investors
have  single point of contact who will remain with them and guide them through
the government process The Investment Promotion Office should have  website with
as much information as possible on it In addition, rather than just waiting for
potential investors to approach it, the Investment Promotion Office could also
actively promote the opportunities in Nigeria and prospective projects to
potential developers through promotions, presentations and road shows National
Gas Focal Point The National Gas Focal Point shall be  Senior person in the
Ministry charged with oversight on the practical implementation of the gas
policy, overcoming any obstacles and ensuring consensus and  coordinated
development among all the participants Dedicated Project Desks To facilitate
institutionalised implementation of the programmes and projects emanating from
the policy, the dedicated “Project Desks” within the Oil and Gas Policy
Divisions will serve as Interface between project developers and Government
Agencies The Project desks will not duplicate the activities of other
departments or agencies of the Government or the regulator Instead, their role
essentially will be to lobby and push projects or programmes provided for or
relevant to the Gas Policy through Government Their job will be to engage and
fully involve other parts of Government and the private sector to ensure that
projects or programmes are implemented Joint Stakeholder Forum In addition to
the specialist centres to be established within MPR for the monitoring and
implementation of policy,  Joint Stakeholder Forum shall be established The
joint stakeholder forum shall consist of representatives of the main stakeholder
groups meeting on  regular basis to address cross-cutting issues on the
implementation of the gas policy and/or specific project()  The membership of
the joint stakeholder forum shall be drawn from active stakeholder groups in the
country Ministry of Petroleum Resources 41 Nigeria National Gas Policy  The
forum will relate with the National Gas Focal Point on matters relating to the
implementation of the gas policy  Health and safety will be  major component
Experience from other countries indicates that if consumers gain an impression
that gas is dangerous, then market growth will be much slower Ensuring  safe
market development will be vital Donor Agencies The government will work with
the donor community to identify aspects of the policy where donor agency support
can be secured Civil Society, Consumer Groups and Associations The government
will work with civil society groups, non- governmental organisations, and
professional associations so as to ensure transparency, accountability and
sustainability in developing the gas sector consumer  Commercial Framework
Background The [commercial framework?] gas market development will be policy
driven and project led, with the objective of achieving an integrated national
gas network The commercial framework consists of two key aspects: • Rules for
access to pipelines and gas networks; • Pricing principles and regulations
Access to Gas Networks An important principle of the gas policy is that there
will be  full legal separation of gas infrastructure ownership and operations,
and trading, such that separate companies will carry out the different
activities These companies may be affiliated as long as they are operated under
consistent FIRS rules for transfer pricing and are subject to regulatory
supervision Gas transportation companies will not be allowed to engage directly
in the purchase and/or sale of gas, and vice versa for trading companies, except
through separate corporate vehicles For purposes of clarity, asset owners in one
segment of the value chain may own and operate assets in different segments of
the value chain if they wish, albeit under different legal entities For example,
holding company may have different companies operating in the upstream,
midstream and downstream Ministry of Petroleum Resources 42 Nigeria National Gas
Policy Distribution exclusivity: Where  project developer has developed or
wishes to develop  distribution area, they may be granted  period of exclusivity
for  limited period of time for sales to customers within the distribution area
through an affiliate gas trading company This will be such that the project
developer can recover their costs of building up the market in the distribution
area plus  reasonable rate of return Avoidance of duplication: As well as
encouraging new entrants into the Nigerian gas industry, the intention of the
policy is to avoid duplication of and unnecessary costs, and to avoid redundant
and underutilised assets The petroleum regulator in implementing the intention
of the policy will approve  duplication of infrastructure assets only if an
economic case can be put forward Network Code Access to all midstream facilities
will be on an open access basis and  network code to manage access will be
developed by the industry with oversight by the petroleum regulatory authority
There will be open access to all pipelines and other essential midstream
infrastructure, whether located offshore or onshore and the petroleum industry
and government will consider the type of network code that is required The
intention is for the Network Code to be simple, easily implementable and
designed in  modular fashion so that additional elements can be added as the
market develops Gas pipeline pressures, gas specifications, metering and other
technical and commercial details relating to infrastructure access will be dealt
with in the Network Code Pending the completion of the Network Code, effective
point-to- point gas transportation agreements, with flexibility for third-party
access, shall be the thrust of the policy Government and the gas industry will
continue to update and implement the network code through constant stakeholder
engagement to enhance market development Gas Swaps There are various commercial
arrangements which market players may use to develop their market position, as
they see fit commercially Swaps is one example of these commercial arrangements
They can be useful in their place and the gas policy does not have  position for
or against swap arrangements Market players will be permitted to engage in gas
swaps if they wish to do so The only caveat is that they will only be allowed
after the parties have met their DSO obligations The gas policy does not intend
to enable parties to use measures in an attempt to avoid their DSO obligations,
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 43 Nigeria National Gas Policy Gas Pricing The
existing gas pricing framework assumes that Nigerian gas compositions are
typically rich in natural gas liquids, and that many producers can produce low-
cost gas at  gas transfer price of less than $/MMbtu when adjusted for the
natural gas liquids Thus, the benefits of the natural gas liquids can be used to
reduce the price of dry gas sold into the domestic market The gas pricing
framework will be clarified by  revised National Domestic Gas Supply & Pricing
Regulation Wholesale Gas Price Regulation Gradual increases in wholesale gas
prices over the years have helped to stimulate the supply of gas However, the
current regulated pricing regime is  transitional measure and, with the market
now demonstrating  growing appetite for bilateral negotiations of wholesale gas
supply transactions, the basis for the transition to market-led pricing is
already in place The transitional pricing framework will be retained, albeit for
short period, until sufficient gas supply volumes are built up and  sufficient
gas market has been established The policy objective is that wholesale gas
pricing will ultimately be market-led, without gas price regulation, except for
monopoly infrastructure During the transition period, the wholesale gas price
for the domestic market will remain subject to the Export Parity Netback Gas
Price (EPP) The average export market price less the costs of regasification,
shipping and liquefaction will be taken as the production price to be applied to
the domestic market Under this approach, producers should be price indifferent
as to whether they deliver gas for the LNG export market or the domestic
Nigerian market Combined with  modest DSO (discussed further below), producers
will have sufficient market incentives to produce for the domestic market For
the sake of clarity, the domestic gas price will be based on the EPP during the
transition period, regardless of what the EPP may be Once wholesale market
conditions apply, then the domestic price will be set by the market, which may
be set at price setting hub points During the transitional period, parties may
engage in transactions on  willing buyer – willing seller basis once they have
met their DSO obligations LNG Export Tolling Price In order to realise more of
the value of the gas product from downstream international LNG export markets,
the policy for LNG liquefaction facilities is that infrastructure owners will be
paid  tolling fee by Government for liquefying, shipping and re- gasification of
Government’ equity gas Ministry of Petroleum Resources 44 Nigeria National Gas
Policy The price and methodology are to be developed in conjunction with the
industry but are likely to be based as much as possible on: • Liquefaction:
Cost-of-service approach using average cost benchmarks that recognises Nigerian
circumstances whilst assuring  rate of return on actual costs; • Regasification:
Published or contract regasification prices at the export market facility; •
Shipping: Published prices, industry standard freight and insurance costs, or
contract prices Cost Benchmarking for Infrastructure Facilities Cost
benchmarking is crucial to sector economics and regulatory decision-making
cost-of-service approach will be adopted using average, standard or benchmark
costs that recognises Nigerian circumstances whilst assuring  rate of return on
actual costs Price Publication and Monitoring intended to be unregulated
following the While prices are transitional period, there will nevertheless be
policy of rigorous price monitoring End user prices will be required to be
published and prices will be monitored to ensure there is no pricing abuse,
particularly during the transitional period before the wholesale market is fully
established Triggers for Wholesale Market Regime The Minister of Petroleum
Resources will declare that  wholesale gas market is in operation when he
determines that one or more of the triggers as defined below have been met
Regulated pricing will then end (except for monopoly infrastructure facilities)
and wholesale gas contracts will apply based on  willing-seller, willing- buyer
basis  wholesale market exists where there are ) pricing reference point(); )
large volumes; ) many buyers; and ) many sellers Trigger points indicating
wholesale gas market in operation in Nigeria include:  When sufficient parts of
the planned national infrastructure are completed, in particular the OB3
pipeline which will act as  connection system between the eastern and western
parts of the nation;  Sufficient gas volumes passing through the completed OB3,
which is  potential physical point gas hub (where gas from the East can be
wheeled to the Western or Northern parts of Nigeria) Sufficient volumes are
considered to be  bcf/ (which is the capacity of the OB3 pipeline); Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 45 Nigeria National Gas Policy  When Oben develops as
physical point gas hub with sufficient volumes and hub pricing can replace
regulated pricing;  When domestic gas volumes exceed export gas volumes (export
volumes are currently approximately  bcfd);  When there are sufficient numbers
of wholesale traders (sellers) and consumers (buyers) Infrastructure Tariffs
introduced tariffs will be Regulated those monopoly infrastructure within the
gas industry, including LNG liquefaction, gas processing, gas storage,
transportation and distribution, in  manner that will provide investors the
opportunity to recover all the eligible costs plus an adequate and reasonable
return on investment for  tariff methodology and model will be developed by the
petroleum regulatory authority with input from industry Power Sector The policy
drive for gas is to ensure gas supply to the power sector as the country’ number
one priority Significant incremental demand for gas will derive from the power
sector, which has been used to low and cross-subsidised gas prices for  long
time The intention is to move to  wholesale market where power generators will
take the market negotiated wholesale price As the power sector is the main
demand sector for natural gas in Nigeria, there will be  strong and  better
coordination between the gas and power sectors than there is now There are
however prevailing risks in the power sector that require the urgent attention
of the Government These include: • Power sector liquidity and payment assurances
to the gas sector; • Power transmission infrastructure limitations; • Adequate
capitalisation and funding of the bulk electricity trader The Government shall
imminently address prevailing power sector risks to enable bankable gas supply
arrangements to the power sector  Fiscal Framework Government Fiscal Philosophy
new fiscal policy and framework is proposed for the Nigerian in  separate and
petroleum sector This is embedded Ministry of Petroleum Resources 46 Nigeria
National Gas Policy complementary National Petroleum Fiscal Policy document
issued by the Government The philosophy for the fiscal framework of the gas
policy is to set fiscal rules that are clear, transparent, globally competitive
and designed to incentivise all participants The role of the government is seen
as not to create economic distortions that confer an advantage on or favour any
particular party The purpose of the fiscal framework is to make gas standalone,
separate from oil Hence, gas projects will be developed based on their economics
and not dependent on or consolidated against oil taxation Current Fiscal
Structure Currently, under the Associated Gas Framework Agreement (AGFA)
(codified in section 11, Petroleum Profits Tax Act), AG and NAG costs can be
recovered from oil income This has led to  number of distortions:  It
discriminates against investors without oil tax capacity (that is, it
discriminates against companies who do not have oil operations, and therefore
are unable to expense their gas costs against oil operations in the manner that
upstream investors in gas projects can);  It incentivises oil companies to build
gas infrastructure (in some cases unnecessarily oversized gas infrastructure)
for fiscal reasons (to include in their cost oil base for offset against their
profit oil, which ultimately is paid for by the Nigerian government);  It has
meant that the only gas infrastructure not built for fiscal purposes has been
built by the Nigerian government, via NGC;  When the oil price is low (as is the
situation now), tax capacity (the ability to collect tax on profit oil) declines
Fiscal Rules of General Application Fiscal Rules of General Application (FRGA)
is the framework through which the interests of the state and that of the
investor are codified Seven main thematic areas that need to be addressed in the
fiscal system for Nigeria are:  Governance – the key governing institutions of
the oil and gas industry and their role as prescribed by the separation
principle, , of policy, regulation and commercial operations;  Funding of the
institutions and funding of government participation in commercial operations;
Fiscal incentives for investments – the balance of risk and reward in  fiscal
designed framework;  Enabling gas exploitation in Nigeria through policy
regulatory and fiscal interventions; Ministry of Petroleum Resources 47 Nigeria
National Gas Policy  The role of the regulator – the principles, powers and
economics of regulation;  The role of the state in natural resource management –
the shareholder responsibilities versus the requirement to meet social needs;
Mitigating social consequences of natural resource exploitation – best practice
community participation An optimum fiscal regime is often  composite of trade-
offs across different objectives: • Early revenues vs investment efficiency; •
Progressivity • Competitiveness; • Early fiscal revenues vs tax incentives that
drive  critical mass of investments Progressive and transparent fiscal regimes
are generally considered to be more stable and credible and, depending on the
fiscal design, they do not compromise on efficiency FRGA are based on clarity
and transparency which require that: • Rules are established by law and
contracts are published; • Laws are consistent with the nation’ jurisprudence; •
Laws and contracts minimise discretion; • Government revenue streams should
occur during all production periods but also should increase with  larger share
of revenues as profitability increases; • Progressive fiscal systems that arise
from FRGAs should be based on:  Royalty (Early Revenues);  Regular Corporate
Income Tax (CITA);  Tax on Rent (Hydrocarbon Tax) Stable and credible fiscal
terms must also demonstrate robustness in the face of volatilities of cost and
price Robustness means that the fiscal system for gas is not subsidised by oil
and vice-versa This can best be achieved through the right pricing of gas and
lower royalties and resource tax Additionally, FRGAs must deter transfer pricing
(cost benchmarking) and review international treaties Principles of the Fiscal
Framework  Pricing should not be fixed by the state – market based pricing will
prevail;  Fiscal policies must enhance investment, be cost efficient and
sustainable in the long run;  Non-consolidation / non-recovery of gas costs from
oil income The fiscal framework intends to remove the distortions in AGFA from
the effective cross- subsidy of oil to the gas sector The gas policy will
therefore ensure that gas project costs are attributed to gas projects, and gas
projects are standalone;  At the same time, the government intends to have
separate fiscal treatment for exploration, production and midstream gas
activities, to relax royalty and tax rates for gas, and incentivise entry into
the midstream These are all designed Ministry of Petroleum Resources 48 Nigeria
National Gas Policy to stimulate investment and ensure that gas projects can be
economically viable from  fiscal viewpoint;  Upstream incentives to invest in
gas-for-development (for example, to promote increased & activity in the onshore
frontier areas by providing globally competitive incentives) can include the
introduction of more favourable upstream terms for gas activities:  Reduced
royalty rates for gas;  Under production sharing contracts (PSCs), introduction
of more favourable production allowances and hydrocarbon tax in the event of gas
production;  Fiscal policy incentives to attract investment into the midstream
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 49 Nigeria National Gas Policy  INDUSTRY
STRUCTURE  Background Solutions to the development of the petroleum sector in
Nigeria (as in any market around the world) are in three areas: • Areas where
Government can have  direct effect: Government sets the policy, law and the
regulatory framework, which directly sets the tone for the whole market • Areas
where Government sets the environment: Government can support the development of
the market, such as pushing the implementation of the Gas policy, and by
attracting investors to the country Government implements policy frameworks and
regulations effectively and provides market support (such as financial
incentives or tax support) • Areas where the market acts directly and there is
no role for Government: Government can set the scene but ultimately the private
sector builds the gas market  Strategic Objectives The gas policy envisions an
industry founded on partnership between the public and private sectors, albeit
with  clear separation of roles between the government and the private sector
The respective roles of the parties envisaged by the Gas Policy are: •
Government:  Policy setting;  Legislation;  Regulation;  Putting in place
mechanisms to encourage the development of markets;  Encouraging payment
discipline;  Encouraging the development of fair and competitive gas markets •
Corporate sector:  Creating markets;  Conducting safe, healthy and
environmentally friendly operations;  Serving their shareholders, as well as
consumers, government and other stakeholders This policy recognises that state-
owned corporations and private sector companies will have the same
responsibilities and opportunities in accordance with extant laws It is the
policy, for example, that nobody will be forced to sell gas to  party only
because that party is Government – owned Ministry of Petroleum Resources 50
Nigeria National Gas Policy Roles of Government-Owned Corporations They are
number of government-owned corporations operating in the Nigerian gas sector
These include:  Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) Nigerian National
Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) is the agency of the government responsible for
representing the commercial interests of the government in petroleum
exploitation and distribution It is involved in natural gas production on
joint-venture (JV) basis with international oil companies (IOCs) and with
international and national independent operators, which act either as the
operator of joint venture concessions held under Oil Mining Leases or as
contractors under Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) NNPC subsidiaries relevant
to the gas sector are: ii Nigerian Petroleum Development Company Limited (NPDC)
NPDC is  fully-owned subsidiary of NNPC NPDC is engaged in oil and gas
exploration and production activities in the hydrocarbon-rich regions of coastal
Nigeria (the Niger Delta), both onshore and offshore, and more recently around
Equatorial Guinea NPDC operates JVs with international and national operators
iii Nigerian Petroleum Investment Management Services Limited (NAPIMS) NNPC’
representatives in the Operating Committees of the various joint ventures are
seconded from Nigerian Petroleum Investment Management Services Limited (NAPIMS)
which is  subsidiary company of NNPC, established to manage NNPC’ interests in
the various oil concessions In addition, all project proposals, joint venture
budgets and key operating decisions in gas projects are subject to NAPIMS
approval iv Nigerian Gas Processing & Transportation Company (NGPTC) Will own
and operate the government - owned gas transmission network   process plants
Nigerian Gas Marketing Company (NGMC) Will own all the supply contracts and will
operate NNPC’ gas supply business The NGPTC and NGMC were created after the
unbundling of the Nigerian Gas Company (NGC), the former NNPC gas transportation
and marketing subsidiary which had operated both as  transporter, wholesale
supplier of gas and franchisor of gas distribution franchises That previous role
restricted the development of  competitive and growing gas market; hence
unbundling is  structural solution that should allow the national oil company to
operate more efficiently in the gas business whilst allowing for  more efficient
development of the market Ministry of Petroleum Resources 51 Nigeria National
Gas Policy The policy is that every entity in the gas industry will be required
to unbundle various activities in particular gas transportation will be
separated from wholesale gas supply in the gas sector, Strategic Partnerships
The government intends to seek strategic partnerships to support operations in
parts of the Nigerian gas industry, in particular for NGPTC Strategic partners
with demonstrable ability to support NGPTC with modern management and
technology, and so increase the effectiveness and value of the company, may be
offered  sizeable shareholding in the company Export Gas Ownership and Tolling
It is the intention of the gas policy for Nigeria to become more involved in
marketing gas in international markets This will initially be through sales to
wholesalers at the regasification terminal but over time, Nigeria will become
involved in sales to downstream customers within international countries This
will apply particularly in Europe where there is more downstream gas market
liberalisation This envisages that the national oil and gas company will retain
ownership of its equity gas which is destined for export markets, until sale to
suppliers or the final consumer in international markets The gas policy
envisages  cost of service tolling structure for future participation of the
national oil company in new LNG projects Wholesale Domestic Market The gas
policy intends  change in market structure conduct and performance with  move
towards wholesale markets Producers, their gas marketing affiliates, or
independent wholesale traders will be licensed as gas suppliers to make gas
available for wholesale delivery within Nigeria Wholesale consumers (industries
and power plants) will buy from suppliers Ministry of Petroleum Resources 52
Nigeria National Gas Policy Separation of Transport and Trading For wholesale
markets to work, the common practice now across most of the world is for  clear
separation of the activities of gas transportation and gas trading Transporters
will not be allowed to trade and traders will not be allowed to transport gas
except through separately incorporated and managed entities This is why NGC or
any other entity will be separated into legally separate transport and trading
companies Domestic Gas Supply Obligations The Government understands why
operators would rather deliver gas to international markets than to the domestic
gas market: • Higher prices can be commanded in export markets; • Payment
discipline is virtually guaranteed in export markets; • The infrastructure
exists so it is much easier to put gas into market Nevertheless, it is the
desire of the Nigerian government and people to build  domestic gas market in
order to ensure national economic development The policy imperative is for gas
development for priority supply to power generation The thrust of the gas policy
is also that gas will be supplied to enable gas based industrialisation Domestic
gas supply obligations have become  standard regulatory tool amongst producer
nations around the world to ensure gas is available for domestic markets The
government considers it reasonable for there to be  domestic gas supply
obligation imposed on producers which is sufficient to kick-start domestic
market development but not so high that producers see it as onerous The
government expects that producers will see the obligations as part of their
contributions to national development and doing business in Nigeria All
producers must make gas available for the domestic market up to the limit of the
obligation As  matter of policy, the issuance and renewal of upstream licences
will be subject to strict compliance by the applicant with its domestic gas
supply obligation Review the Gas Aggregation Policy The development of
competitive market for gas supply inevitably means that Nigeria will ultimately
move away from the concept of gas aggregation The Gas Aggregation Company of
Nigeria (GACN) was initially licenced as  vehicle for the industry to operate
the aggregation process for  transitional period of five years only In the years
since this model was established, GACN has been largely unsuccessful in meeting
its objective of growing the domestic gas industry to maturity Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 53 Nigeria National Gas Policy The government will review
the licence of GACN and will determine what role it can usefully play in the new
industry structure as laid out in this gas policy  Gas Market Structure
Philosophy of the Regulatory Structure There will be  strong independent
regulator that will be responsible for the technical and economic regulation of
the gas sector The role includes minimising and, where possible, eliminating
market distortions, and implementing licensing, monitoring, investigations, and
dispute mediation powers The licensing regime will cover every activity
including, but not limited to, licences for exploration, production,
constructing and operating gas processing plants, liquefaction plants,
constructing and operating gas storage facilities, transportation pipelines,
distribution networks, undertaking the supply of natural gas including gas
trading, and acting as  “supplier of last resort” All regulatory and pseudo-
regulatory activities will be removed from corporate entities and taken over by
the regulator This includes, for example, distribution licensing and franchising
arrangements by any party In addition,  network code will be introduced to
provide conditions for non-discriminatory access for third parties to all
infrastructure along the supply chain Supply segment: The wholesale gas supply
segment will be open under  Supply Licence to any gas producer or gas merchant
who meets the regulator’ qualifying criteria as an Eligible Supplier An Eligible
Supplier shall be entitled to purchase gas from  producer or any other Eligible
Supplier for on-sale to any off-taker The policy seeks to promote more efficient
utilisation of capital by encouraging producers to focus their investments and
activities more on exploration, development and production of gas, whilst
specialised midstream investors can process and transport gas The regulator’
role is to calibrate the supply segment such that it becomes open to as many
players as possible in order to foster competition for the market amongst
licensed entities This competitive pressure ultimately compels innovation and
efficiency in gas development because the profit motive provides an incentive to
control costs Gas prices should come down as  long-run effect of increased
supply and competition Midstream segment: The policy objective for the midstream
is to attract as much investment as possible into gas processing, transportation
and storage in order to bridge Nigeria’ gas abundance with growing demand
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 54 Nigeria National Gas Policy Figure :
Commercial Structure for the Gas Sector Source: MPR Gas Policy Team 2016 The gas
policy envisages  cost of service tolling structure in the midstream such that
producers can focus on exploration and production activities while midstream
investors specialise in processing, transportation and storage of gas, or in
marketing of gas, for upstream producers Given the network-bound and monopoly
features of the midstream, the regulatory objective should be utility regulation
The relevant regulatory tools in this regard are: • Competition regulation; •
Open access rules; •  Gas Network Code; • Tariff regulation on  cost of service
rate of return basis Ministry of Petroleum Resources 55 Nigeria National Gas
Policy Downstream segment: The downstream segment will be open for wholesale gas
supply by Eligible Suppliers to any Eligible Offtaker who may commercially
bypass distribution licensees consistent with the open access rules Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 56 Nigeria National Gas Policy  DEVELOPING GAS RESOURCES
Diversification of Supply Sources Nigeria needs to diversify its gas supply
sources from  national and energy security perspective In order to improve
security of gas supply, the gas policy intends to encourage an environment that
ensures deliberate gas exploration and production in other regions of Nigeria
The policy shall promote exploration activities for additional gas resources in
other geologically prospective terrains, especially the offshore and inland
basins, including the review of the commercial terms upon which titles in these
basis are held Significant gas reserves have been discovered in some of the
inland basis These reserves have  potential to contribute significantly to the
development of distributed power generation assets in Nigeria, and thereby
enhance the diversity of gas supply to the power and industrial sectors Niger
Delta Gas Resources Gas developments to date have been undertaken largely,
almost exclusively, in the Niger Delta Most of the gas discoveries were by
accident, with  company typically exploring for oil and discovering gas Most of
the gas production in the Niger Delta is produced in association with oil
production There are also some dry gas fields, whose output is mostly dedicated
to LNG exports Table : Nigerian Associated and Non-Associated Gas Production ()
Year Associated Gas (AG), bscf Non- Associated Gas (NAG), bscf Total Production,
bscf 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 ,542 ,599 ,594 ,582 ,865
,839 ,872 ,787 ,880 ,740 Source: DPR Annual Report, 2015 Note: Total AG and NAG
production 748 ,008 987 646 955 ,127 ,123 ,025 ,168 ,262 ,290 ,607 ,580 ,228
,820 ,967 ,996 ,812 ,049 ,003 There are security of supply risks with the
current situation, emanating from the Niger Delta militancy, and consequent
disruptive effects on gas production, the environment and wider economy Ministry
of Petroleum Resources 57 Nigeria National Gas Policy The government realises
that steps must be taken to reduce the disruptions to production from the Niger
Delta insecurity and is taking measures to restore long term stability to the
region In the meantime, operators are expected to ensure that they take
sufficient measures to protect their assets and make them secure Ultimately,
ensuring  reduction in militancy and ensuring the security of facilities will be
collaborative effort among government, industry and Niger Delta communities
Benue Trough and Sedimentary Basins of Nigeria As well as the offshore and Niger
Delta, many other sedimentary basins have been identified (but not yet
developed) in Nigeria, including the Benue Trough, the Anambra Basin, Kerri
Basin, Yola Basin, Gongola Basin, Bida Basin, Lullemeden Basin (with Niger) and
the Chad Basin (with Chad)  key sedimentary basin is the Anambra Basin, which
has been barely explored but is considered to be most likely extensive and rich
in dry natural gas Figure 10: Petroleum Basins in Nigeria Source: NNPC, 2016
Identifying Low Cost Gas Resources Except for gas which is held by Government
through NNPC in joint venture with third parties or on  sole risk basis by
independents, the Nigerian government has ownership rights over virtually all
the gas resources in the country Within this overall portfolio are several low
cost wet gas resources, where the inherent value of the natural gas liquids
could be leveraged to yield an affordable gas price for the domestic market
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 58 Nigeria National Gas Policy To achieve gas
based industrialisation low-cost gas resources will be identified and dedicated
to the Nigerian domestic market Portfolio management methodologies will be
utilised to prioritise the development of low cost gas to be identified, with
the subsequent intention to have  proportion of that dedicated to domestic
markets Table : Proved Reserves and Resources in Place across Ownership Types 2P
GAS RESERVES / RESOURCES IN PLACE AS AT  JANUARY 2016 Gas Reserves (TCF) NAG AG
Resources in Place 13 82 87 71 TOTAL Ownership Type of Gas Proved (2P) 33 12 44
01 Proved (2P) 64 67 43 03 Resources in Place 60 80 41 60 Proved (2P) 98 80 87
04 Resources in Place /  NPDC  NPDC JV  NNPC JV  PSC 73 62 29 32 Sole Risk/
Independents  41 31 88 41 89 66 46 87 30 99 34 30 TOTAL Source: DPR 2016
Clarifying Gas Terms for PSCs Nigerian PSCs are structured more for crude oil
exploration and development The PSCs have incorporated gas utilisation clauses
but they do not contain commercial terms between NNPC and the contractor for
development of gas discovered within the concession The PSC merely provides that
in the event of the discovery of  viable quantity of natural gas, the contractor
shall investigate the discovery and submit proposals to NNPC for the development
of the gas, and  separate agreement is then negotiated between NNPC and the
contractor for  gas development The absence of clarity regarding terms for gas
commercialisation means that significant discovered gas resources remain
undeveloped in Nigeria’ PSC blocks, especially in offshore basins Urgent
attention to this issue is now required The government will develop  model Gas
Development Agreement containing its terms for the development of gas resources
in PSC concessions The policy is that PSC terms will be defined to ensure
development of gas resources, for the benefit of the nation The government will
present the industry with  model Gas Development Agreement containing the terms
development of gas resources in PSC concessions for its Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 59 Nigeria National Gas Policy This agreement will address the
contractual and fiscal issues relevant to upstream gas production in PSCs while
providing some flexibility for adjustment as may be required  Gas Flaring
Background Gas flaring has  direct ongoing environmental cost and addressing it
is  COP22 commitment In addressing this, the MPR will work in collaboration with
the Federal Ministry of Environment The flaring of natural gas that is produced
in association with oil is one of the most egregious environmental and energy
waste practices in the Nigerian petroleum industry While gas flaring levels have
declined in recent years, it is still  prevailing practice in the petroleum
industry Billions of cubic meters of natural gas are flared annually at oil
production locations resulting in atmospheric pollution severely affecting host
communities Gas flaring affects the environment and human health, produces
economic loss, deprives the government of tax revenues and trade opportunities,
and deprives consumers of  clean and cheaper energy source Effective action on
gas flaring would address  long held grievance for the Niger Delta region
History of Nigerian Gas Flaring Legislation Although Nigeria still flares
significant portion of its gross natural gas production (19% of AG, 331sbcf in
2015), the amount of gas flared has significantly reduced in recent years Its
ranking has dropped from the 2nd to the 5th largest natural gas flaring country
in the world (according to Cedigaz and OPEC) or 7th (according to GGFR 2016)
Figure 11: World’ Top  Natural Gas Flaring Countries, 2014 Source: US EIA, based
on Cedigaz and OPEC Annual Statistical Bulletin, 2015 To ensure that flared gas
is utilised in markets, the government will take measures to ensure that flare
capture and utilisation projects industry, are developed and will work
collaboratively with Ministry of Petroleum Resources 60 Nigeria National Gas
Policy development partners, providers of flare-capture technologies and third-
party investors to this end, without prejudice to the enforcement of applicable
sanctions Figure 12: Gas Flaring Trend in Nigeria,  Gas Production and Gas
Flared (bscf) 3500 80% 70% 3000 60% 2500 50% 2000 40% 1500 30% 1000 20% 500 10%
% 200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  200  201  201  201  201  201  201  NAG
(bscf) 392 411 516 525 509 748 1008 987 646 955 1127 1123 1025 1168 1263 AG
(bscf) 1552 1341 1387 1584 1626 1542 1599 1594 1582 1865 1839 1872 1787 1880
1741 Gas Flared (bscf) ,001 921 801 852 806 820 817 671 536 545 504 465 428 379
331 Flared as % of AG 64% 69% 58% 54% 50% 53% 51% 42% 34% 29% 27% 25% 24% 20%
19% AG (bscf) NAG (bscf) Gas Flared (bscf) Flared as % of AG Source: DPR 2015;
Analysis: MPR Gas Policy Team 2016 Note: NAG and AG are total gas produced Gas
Re-Injection Nigeria is an example of an oil exporting country where the
associated gas was mostly flared or re-injected in oil fields during the last
decades, in the absence of commercial uses for gas Historically, there have been
no restrictions in Nigeria on any company to re-inject any extra gas However,
the new position is that the government prefers the utilisation of flared gas
into markets, utilised by different downstream sectors, rather than flared or
re-injected with no valid technical reason It is the policy that gas utilisation
will be  priority consideration over other considerations for handling of
associated gas In the absence of compelling technical reasons or  viable outlet
for the gas, the Government intends to restrict undue re-injection of associated
gas Ministry of Petroleum Resources 61 Nigeria National Gas Policy Gas Flare-Out
through Gas Utilisation Projects Under the gas policy, the government intends to
maximise utilisation of associated gas to be treated for supply to power
generation or industry Routine gas flaring reduction projects are not to be seen
as isolated elements of oil and gas sector operations Flared gas utilisation is
part of the wider gas policy to develop Nigeria’ gas resources and release much
more of the value from national gas resources The best prospects for reducing
remaining gas flare sites are through projects developed by investors and
companies with experience in innovation in modest size projects in challenging
environments and with strong local engagements plans Some examples could be: •
Plans for metered electricity to host communities immediately adjacent to flare
sites; • Projects which could be of significance to local regional electricity
distribution companies as embedded power projects; Critical levers for rural
economic development in the Niger Delta, which can provide islands of stable
metered electricity or gas products, such as LPG These can give the cluster area
around  site  significant economic advantage for hosting businesses New Flare
Capture Technologies Gas flaring reduction technology has the potential to be
one of the great energy and environmental success stories Unlike long-term
greenhouse gas solutions such as carbon sequestration or wider deployment of
nuclear power, gas flaring can be dealt with today through  variety of existing
high-performance technologies New technology solutions for the capture and
utilisation of associated gas are encouraged, which could include, for example:
Power generation projects designed to utilise flared gas;  Replacing diesel fuel
with gas for power generation with small gas engines;  Combining new processing
systems with efficient fuel flexible gas turbines;  Small-scale GTL or mini-LNG
plants;  Gas infrastructure (processing and transportation) solutions;
Identifying and designing the full value chain for gas supply, including gas
gathering pipelines, to connect different small- and large-size flaring fields
The commercialisation of flared gas for supply into the domestic market is  high
priority strategy for the Government in achieving the national mandate for
flare-out by To ensure that flared gas is put to use in markets, the government
will take measures to ensure that flare capture and utilisation Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 62 Nigeria National Gas Policy projects are developed, and
will work collaboratively with industry, development partners, providers of
flare-capture technologies and third party investors to this end Flare-Out
Targets The Government plans industry consultation mechanism, as an important
measure in ensuring flaring targets are feasible and regulations are realistic
to open an Gas Flaring Penalties The current gas flare penalty of N10/Mscf
(equivalent US $03) of associated gas flared is too low, having been eroded in
value over time, and is not acting as intended, as  disincentive Consequently,
the low penalty has made gas flaring  much cheaper option for operators compared
to the alternatives of marketing or re-injection The intention of Government is
to increase the gas flaring penalty to an appropriate level sufficient to de-
incentivise the practice of gas flaring whilst introducing other measures to
encourage efficient gas utilisation It will also be an offence for false data
regarding gas flaring to be provided, with  steep tier of fines for providing
false data to any FG agency relating to flares New Field Developments The
government intends to develop regulations which will prohibit any greenfield oil
and/or gas project from moving forward until there is  proper integrated plan
for the development of the hydrocarbons thereby ensuring that no gas flaring
occurs during production of hydrocarbons, except in very special circumstances
such as emergencies for operational reasons Existing Fields For existing AG
fields, brown field sites, the government will also consider other options to
ensure significant gas flare reductions  Operators of existing AG fields need to
produce integrated gas flare reduction plans; they will then be expected to
implement those plans;  The government will consider  new sliding scale penalty
to be introduced for existing brown field sites, especially for JV and Service
contracts which contribute 88% of the total associated gas flared in the
country;  Existing AG fields need to start planning and investing in the
utilisation of the associated gas to be supplied into the market, and to come up
with economic plans for their development;  The government will consider
regulations to allow for open access to gas gathering pipelines, to ensure that
flared gas has access to gas gathering systems and gas processing facilities;
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 63 Nigeria National Gas Policy  If the proposed
regulations do not prove enough, the government will consider further measures
to ensure effective and significant gas flare reductions Uneconomic Fields For
those few fields where it is clearly shown to be uneconomic to develop and
implement  gas flare reduction plan, the government will consider other options
These could include orders to shut in production at those fields  Gas Field
Development Plans Government considers that the best time to intervene to ensure
an optimised gas development plan is at the approval stage AG fields are
unlikely to be allowed to be developed unless there is  gas field development
plan (FDP) in place FDPs without acceptable plans for AG development should be
deferred in favour of other projects All upstream development proposals (oil or
gas) should contain:   study of the economic efficiency of the FDP;   practical
gas utilisation plan for field life;  An assessment of the reliability and
robustness of the marketing plan;   study of the use of shared infrastructure
especially for gathering and processing;  Clear HSE plans with targets Clear
performance criteria should be set for the retention, withdrawal and
relinquishment of exploration licences  Gas Resource Management Plan Gas
development must be undertaken in accordance with Nigeria’ national socio-
economic development priorities Accordingly, the government through the MPR and
with support from NNPC and industry will produce  Gas Resource Management Plan
This will: identify gas resources in different geological areas; identify
current and potential gas markets; identify infrastructure needs; • • • •
analyse how best to access low cost gas for delivery to domestic gas markets The
Gas Resource Management Plan will classify gas resources according to the
following categories: • Low-cost assets dedicated to domestic gas supply
(National Preferential Assets); • Assets dedicated to export; • National
Strategic Gas Reserve (reserved for future development); • Optional assets (sole
risk assets) Ministry of Petroleum Resources 64 Nigeria National Gas Policy
INFRASTRUCTURE  National Gas Infrastructure Blueprint The key gas infrastructure
needs will be identified and appropriate recommendations for upgrading the
design of the existing National Gas Infrastructure Blueprint will be made to
Government The gas infrastructure required will be identified under these
categories:  Existing gas infrastructure: Review of the existing gas
transmission infrastructure in place  Gas Master Plan Infrastructure Blueprint:
What was planned in the Gas Master Plan?  What has been achieved?  What parts
are still valid now?  New gas transportation links  Upgrading NGPTC network:
Upgrades needed to the existing NGPTC network  Alternative gas transportation
options:  CNG by road, rail or barge;  LNG by road, rail or barge;  other
virtual pipeline options that may be identified  Key anchor customer
infrastructure: The investments required at key anchor customer sites, for
example at Ajaokuta Steel  Distribution infrastructure: Local distribution
companies licensed by the petroleum regulatory authority  Security of gas supply
investment: The additional infrastructure needed to improve the robustness of
the Gas Infrastructure Blueprint and ensure gas supply security  Resource
clusters: Identification of gas resources and clusters Identification of
critical gas infrastructure: Critical gas infrastructure includes the following:
• Aba-Owerri-Nnewi-Onitsha Pipeline Project; • Calabar-Ajaokuta Pipeline (CAP)
Project; • Ajaokuta-Kaduna-Kano (AKK) Pipeline Project; • ELP-Ibadan-Jebba
Pipeline Project; • Obiafu-Obrikom-Oben (OB3) Pipeline Project; • Expansion of
ELP Phase  Project; • Oso Platform to QIT Pipeline Project; • Erha / Bosi
Pipeline Project; Ministry of Petroleum Resources 65 Nigeria National Gas Policy
• Trans-Sahara Gas Pipeline Project Entry into the midstream will be liberalised
and incentivised to allow private sector investors to develop infrastructure to
process, transport and store natural gas Figure 13: Map of Nigeria showing Gas
Demand and Infrastructure Source: MPR Gas Policy Team, 2016 The Infrastructure
Blueprint of the Gas Master will be upgraded and amended within the context of
the Gas Resource Management Plan The amended and updated Infrastructure
Blueprint will identify resources and resource clusters, identify critical
infrastructure and prioritise developments Working in collaboration with the
industry and NGPTC, the MPR will take the lead in ensuring the Infrastructure
Blueprint is updated The final version of the Infrastructure Blueprint will be
made public as an aid to development This means that if  developer wishes to
pursue  project which is not in the blueprint, they will be permitted to do so,
provided that they obtain the relevant Ministry of Petroleum Resources 66
Nigeria National Gas Policy licence which will be granted based upon an
evaluation of the economic benefits of the project  Need to Improve the Whole
Supply Chain The Nigerian government is aware that there are currently
challenges across the whole supply chain but the government is determined to
improve the following: • Physical infrastructure, including gas infrastructure,
roads, telecommunications and others; • Business environment; • Cost
optimisation in gas projects; • Increasing transparency and minimising
inefficiencies Ministry of Petroleum Resources 67 Nigeria National Gas Policy
BUILDING GAS MARKETS  Introduction  key aspect of the vision of the gas policy
is for gas-based industrialisation of Nigeria The intention of the Government is
that natural gas exports will continue, albeit consistent with Nigeria’
aspirations for domestic gas market development Renewal of licences and leases
will be subject to  commitment by the licensee or lessee to the development of
the discovered gas resources within the licence or lease area for domestic or
export projects, as applicable, and within  specific timeframe Strategic
Objective The vision of the gas policy is for gas-based industrialisation of
Nigeria Means of growing the domestic gas market which have been identified
under this gas policy include: Identifying and developing clusters and
industrial parks;   Market growth from anchor customers;  Gas based
industrialisation;  Gas for Development Programme;  Alternative markets and uses
for Gas: - CNG; - NGVs; - LPG; - LNG vehicles; - LNG for agriculture and agro-
allied industries  Financing methods;  Improvements to the supply chain  Export
Projects The Policy focus is to gain more of the value from downstream export
markets Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Through the Nigerian LNG Company, Nigeria is
one of the world’ leading LNG exporter nations Although Nigerian LNG is sold to
Far Eastern markets in the Pacific basin (and were indeed the main set of
markets for Nigerian LNG in 2015), Atlantic basin markets historically have been
and in the future will be the main markets for Nigerian LNG This is because of
their geographic proximity to Nigeria and the consequent lower transportation
costs of LNG North America is no longer  market for gas exports within the
Atlantic Basin, leaving Europe and South America as the main destinations for
Nigerian LNG Both of these Ministry of Petroleum Resources 68 Nigeria National
Gas Policy markets however have challenges for  country like Nigeria that wishes
to maximise LNG exports European economic growth remains below expectations and
European policy drive towards energy savings measures throughout the EU leads to
restrained demand for LNG in Europe Despite lowered expectations, Europe remains
large gas market and will continue to need considerable amounts of imported LNG
and pipeline gas South America is seeing fast growing markets for LNG but  large
proportion of supplies for those markets is currently sourced from Trinidad &
Tobago While Nigeria certainly could sell to South American markets the gas
policy realises that some ground has to be made up to become established there
The gas policy foresees Nigerian gas exports being largely directed to European
markets and South America, although there will be some opportunities for exports
to Far Eastern markets  Retaining Ownership of LNG Nigeria will continue to seek
opportunities in the global LNG market either through the expansion of the
capacity of the Nigerian LNG company or through the development of the OK and
Brass LNG or other LNG projects as may be considered appropriate and
commercially feasible The intention, however, is for Nigeria to retain ownership
of its natural gas up to the point of delivery into markets The government
therefore intends to move to  tolling arrangement with respect to exports of
Government’ equity LNG from new projects, whereby the LNG liquefaction facility
is paid  fee for liquefying the government share of gas produced from its
assets, and LNG shippers are paid  transportation fee for transporting it
Ownership and title to the gas therefore remains with the government entity up
to the point where it is regasified at the export market regasification terminal
and sold to shippers  Improve LNG Marketing As Nigerian government entities
become more experienced in gas marketing, it is expected that the government
entity will be able to retain ownership further downstream, gaining access to
transport networks and selling directly to large consumers As an example of the
concept, Russian Gazprom has an equity shareholding in the UK-Belgium Gas
Interconnector Gazprom subsequently applied for  UK shipper’ licence and now
operates  gas marketing operation in the UK, selling Russian gas directly to
consumers in the UK Regional and International Pipeline Projects West African
Gas Pipeline (WAGP) The WAGP is the gas export pipeline originating at Lagos as
an extension from the ELPS and delivering to consumers in Benin, Togo and Ghana
There have been numerous problems with this export pipeline project, including:
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 69 Nigeria National Gas Policy Figure 14: West
African Gas Pipeline, Route • Vastly over-costed infrastructure; • Shortage of
supplies from the Nigerian side; • Payment defaults by some WAGP customers; •
Pipeline vandalism in Nigeria Source: ERERA Forum, 2012 The government is aware
of the problems with the WAGP project and shall take appropriate corrective
steps to ensure sustained gas supply into the West African region For the
Country to maintain its position as  leader in the transportation of Gas in the
West African sub region, government shall facilitate the business and regulatory
environment for the development of the backbone gas infrastructure and
extensions for the Trans-Saharan Gas Pipeline Trans-Saharan Gas Pipeline Figure
15: Trans-Saharan Gas Pipeline, Route Initial feasibility studies have been
carried out and MOUs have been signed amongst the governments of Nigeria, Niger
and Algeria As  first step towards implementation of the project, the backbone
infrastructure of  gas corridor from the south east to the northern most parts
of Nigeria will be built, which will allow for subsequent extensions to major
population load centres throughout Nigeria Source: NNPC, 2015 Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 70 Nigeria National Gas Policy  Growing Domestic Gas Markets
Encouraging Gas Projects – Project Based Approach Supply to the domestic gas
market has not grown as expected or forecast New measures are therefore required
to support the growth of domestic gas markets Gas development was previously
based around export gas projects with some local market development as
secondary objective, which did not deliver Gas developments will henceforth be
on  project-by-project basis but backed by  clear DSO, which means delivery of
domestic gas projects will be the primary not secondary objective of project
developers Within this regulatory push (of  DSO), gas development will be
essentially market-led rather than centrally planned Rather than trying to
continue with  centrally planned national market development, the gas policy
proposes  project-based and market opportunity-led approach as  more effective
way to grow gas markets Appropriate frameworks will be developed to support gas-
based projects, including gas transport pipelines and associated anchor
customers or demand clusters Projects will largely be developed by project
developers from the private sector The government will set the environment and
support investors in gas-based industrial projects with appropriate
interventions to bring their projects to fruition Gas-Based Industrialisation
The vision of the gas policy is for gas-based industrialisation of Nigeria This
means that gas-fired power plants will continue to be targeted but the
government will also promote the development of gas for industrial purposes The
long-term vision for Nigeria is  diverse industrial base that is fired by
natural gas Market Growth from Anchor Customers Project-based gas
industrialisation will mean that gas market development projects will grow
around anchor customers Anchor customers are large consumption centres where the
demand is large enough and which are profitable enough, to enable the
infrastructure to be built (including gas gathering and processing; gas
transportation pipelines; and consumption site facilities) There are essentially
four types of anchor customer that  natural gas project-based approach will
support: • Gas fired power generation; • Large industrial customers, such as
Ajaokuta Steel; Ministry of Petroleum Resources 71 Nigeria National Gas Policy •
Distribution companies; • Industrial parks Identifying and Developing Clusters
cluster in the Nigerian energy context, is  geographical part of the country
where there is  demand centre (large enough and with economically viable
consumers),  short transportation system and  source of energy supply Because
there currently remain some problems with Transmission Company of Nigeria (TCN)
in terms of the ability to consistently transfer large volumes of stable
electricity around the country on  national grid, alternative ways of getting
energy to consumers is under consideration by many parties Gas and LPG can be
parts of the solution As part of the gas policy, studies will be undertaken to
identify where there are clusters which could form anchor loads for  gas project
The government will facilitate the development of these gas projects to clusters
but the private sector is expected to develop the projects The gas policy also
encourages further gas development for other projects, including: •
Petrochemical plants; • Fertiliser plants; • Village power plants; • Embedded
power plants; • CNG plants; • LPG plants; • CNG:  Natural Gas Vehicles (NGV);
CNG transport by barge, rail and/or road; • LNG for domestic downstream
applications, such as:  LNG vehicles;  LNG to power;  LNG to industry;  LNG to
Agriculture • GTL projects Alternative Markets / Uses for Gas Other markets for
and uses of gas are also possible and the intention of the gas policy is to
support project developers and investors seeking to develop alternative gas
markets in realising their projects Natural Gas Vehicles (NGV) Vehicles using
CNG may be appropriate for some large Nigerian cities under  single regulatory
authority, such as Lagos, Port Harcourt, Abuja, Kano and Kaduna for example or
where there are large vehicle fleets such as large corporate fleets or buses
and/or taxis in large urban areas Ministry of Petroleum Resources 72 Nigeria
National Gas Policy NGVs really take off when there is  determined government
push behind the initiative When there is  push which generates  demand, then the
markets starts to provide NGV filling stations NGVs started to take off in
London (UK) for example when the Mayor announced that taxis that were not
converted to at least dual fuel would not have their licences renewed NGVs also
have  wide use in the West African region outside Nigeria, specifically in Ghana
The government intends to support CNG penetration, to set the environment, help
to develop fleet markets in some large cities and to ensure adequate gas supply
but the government does not intend to directly invest or become operationally
involved Having set the framework, the government wishes to encourage private
sector investment and operations Gas for Rail Electrification Another important
gas market is the provision of gas to power for the provision of electricity for
rail electrification across Nigeria This can include electrification of some of
the existing and proposed new railway lines CNG Transportation This does not
refer to using CNG as the vehicle fuel, instead it refers to the different ways
in which compressed natural gas can be transported around the country This can
provide an alternative to pipeline gas transport for inland destinations CNG by
Road: As an alternative to building  gas pipeline, CNG can be transported to
markets by truck on roads The advantages are that gas markets can be reached
that would otherwise be uneconomic to reach (the average cost is lower), thus
opening up new gas markets The main disadvantage is that this puts further
pressure on sub- standard Nigerian roads and on the limited number of and poor
quality of trucks (high marginal cost) The risk of accidents and explosions in
populated areas is also higher using CNG by road This could be  viable option
for some inland industrial centres, such as Nnewi (Anambra) for example CNG by
Rail: This option has the same benefits as CNG by road The risks of accidents
are less though, giving further advantages As the rail network improves this
could become  viable option CNG by Barge: Another alternative to using pipelines
could be the transportation of CNG by boat up the river Niger or along the coast
LNG Trucks Vehicles carrying liquefied gas are  new technology and may have
advantages over CNG by road because substantially larger volumes of gas can be
transported as LNG (LNG carries 600 times the energy content of gaseous gas)
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 73 Nigeria National Gas Policy Under the gas
policy, the Nigerian government encourages the private sector to take forward
proposals and invest in this alternative transportation method  Policy for
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) LPG Production and Consumption Liquefied Petroleum
Gas (LPG) is  mixture of propane and butane (generally approximately 50% each)
and is produced as  by-product from refining crude oil or processing natural gas
LPG presents  window of opportunity to bring about improved quality of life for
the populace  vibrant LPG market in Nigeria will no doubt induce  positive
ripple effect that will translate into more jobs for the millions of unemployed
Nigerians and business opportunities For instance, local manufacturing of gas
cylinders, autogas and power generation services would be encouraged as  result
of increased demand Fiscal and environmental benefits in the form of increased
tax revenues and carbon credits for government are very crucial even as Nigeria
joins the rest of the global community to benefit from the use of clean fuels
like LPG Production of LPG in Nigeria is currently approximately 4mt per annum
of LPG, largely for exports This is mostly produced from natural gas processing
and some smaller production from the NNPC refineries at Warri and Port Harcourt
and Kaduna Presently, the major source of LPG in the country is from the gas
processing facilities, especially the Nigerian LNG (NLNG) company Nigeria
Petroleum Marketing Company (NPMC, formerly Petroleum Products Marketing Company
or PPMC), the division of NNPC which acts as its marketing arm within Nigeria,
is the main operator in the LPG market and is of  sufficient size and power to
affect the performance of the whole LPG industry in Nigeria It owns and operates
nine LPG storage depots around the country NPMC buys its LPG from the NNPC
refineries and provides storage for importers NPMC sells LPG to export markets,
to marketers in bulk and is also allowed to retail directly to end users If
Nigerian gas production increases to 100 mtoe  year, LPG production could also
increase to approximately 10 million tonnes  year As well as consequences for
the domestic natural gas market in Nigeria, there are also consequences and
opportunities for domestic LPG markets in Nigeria and the region LPG is
therefore an important gas product in its own right and an important part of
gas policy for Nigeria given its potential to increase natural gas usage
However, as with natural gas, this resource is largely unused Most of the
production is exported and LPG consumption within Nigeria is recorded at  much
lower figure, at around 400,000 tonnes  year as of The potential demand is much
higher, at probably - mpta Nigerian LPG consumption per head is very low
relative to other or neighbouring African countries As with natural gas,
insufficient LPG product is being made available for the domestic market NLNG is
offering 250,000 mtpa to the domestic market but it is not being taken Ministry
of Petroleum Resources 74 Nigeria National Gas Policy up, largely because of
infrastructure restrictions, namely in passing through the import jetties In
many emerging markets around the world, LPG has an unofficial, undeclared market
that operates outside the official attention of the national regulatory
authorities It is suspected that Nigeria has  similar situation, with undeclared
imports coming over the border from Niger or Benin, as well as some undeclared
domestic production and diversion of supplies Development of LPG market in
Nigeria is urgently required in the areas of domestic, power generation, autogas
and industrial purposes LPG Infrastructure The domestic Nigerian LPG market
suffers from an inefficient distribution chain and prices that are higher than
they would be in an efficient functioning market Jetties: The only functioning
import jetties currently are at Apapa, Lagos LPG supplies are restricted to the
jetties at Apapa which are all operated by Hyson,  JV of NNPC and VITOL, which
brings in VITOL LPG as well as third party LPG Two new terminals are under
construction at Calabar and Port Harcourt Depot Storage: There is limited depot
storage, 14,500 tonnes of private and ,000 tonnes PPMC storage, at Apapa (Lagos)
and Calabar Some other limited depot storage facilities around the country owned
by PPMC are non-functioning Road Transport: There is limited road transport to
take LPG from Apapa and Calabar to distribution terminals around the country
There are around 900 functioning (although old) trucks nationwide with  total
transport capacity of around ,000 tonnes Distribution Terminals: There are 200
distribution terminals (bottling plants) around the country with around 13,000
tonnes capacity in total Cylinders: The most critical infrastructure problem,
alongside that of the import jetties, is the state of cylinders in the country
There are around 8m cylinders, of which some 10% could be cleared as safe Unsafe
cylinders, owned by the consumers and which are cross-filled, are major safety
hazards The Scope of the LPG Policy The scope of the policy for LPG in Nigeria
covers its uses in the following areas:  Domestic: Broader penetration of LPG
into homes – low income, rural etc;  Power Generation: Encouraging the wider use
of LPG in off grid and on grid power generation;  Autogas: Encouraging the wider
use of LPG of autogas in Nigeria;  Industrial: Expansion of LPG use in
industrial applications to include: Ministry of Petroleum Resources 75 Nigeria
National Gas Policy  Agriculture: Dairy production; poultry farming; CO2
generation for greenhouses etc;  Industry – Steam and direct heat applications,
glass production, clean food applications;  Commercial – hotels, laundries etc
Domestic Applications Cooking energy has evolved from the use of fire wood and
other biomass sources, to even more inefficient high polluting and health
endangering fuels, such as dirty hydrocarbon related energy sources as
traditional fuels for domestic cooking/heating activities Approximately 30
million households and more than 100 million Nigerians depend on wood as  source
of energy for cooking but this has come with collateral damage to human health,
environment and economy of the country According to WHO, smoke from open fire is
Nigeria’ third biggest killer with over 95,000 deaths annually behind Malaria
and HIV/AIDS Moreover, traditional cooking methods are expensive, burning up to
90% more wood than is necessary and costing poor families money that could be
put to better use on education, health and nutrition The use of firewood also
contributes to massive deforestation especially in northern Nigeria while
compounding the challenges of climate change Similarly, the use of kerosene as
cooking energy source also shares most of the challenges of firewood LPG brings
manifold benefits to human health, environment as well as economy of Nigeria As
domestic cooking fuel LPG therefore presents valuable opportunities to
simultaneously combat climate change, reverse deforestation and improve
community health and rural economy and livelihood LPG has relatively low
emissions when compared to other cooking fuels such as firewood and kerosene
According to the World Liquefied Petroleum Gas Association (WLPGA), LPG delivers
far higher calorific value/heat content per unit compared to kerosene or
firewood In Nigeria, NLPGA research in 2015 shows that the end user pays an
average amount of N130 for  litre of kerosene The average cost of 1kg of LPG is
N240, which means 37kg of LPG equates to N89 It goes to show that even against
subsidised kerosene  consumer of kerosene will spend N130 per litre for fuel
compared with N89 the same consumer will spend on unsubsidized LPG Furthermore,
with increased demand will come greater economies of scale, which will further
reduce the price of LPG This has been one of the main reasons the market has
attracted hundreds of millions of dollars of private funding and has grown by
over 400% since It is expected that the current price of LPG will further reduce
by the time LPG is accepted as the predominant domestic fuel across the breadth
and length of the country Despite the huge reserves of natural gas in the
country and all the interventions by the FGN, the transformation towards making
LPG the primary cooking fuel for Nigerians has not been very successful Many
Nigerians do not have access to cooking gas (LPG) while for those that already
use LPG suffer periodic scarcities of LPG Ministry of Petroleum Resources 76
Nigeria National Gas Policy Domestic LPG production accounts for approximately %
of household energy mix in Nigeria as shown below: Figure 16: Nigerian Household
Energy Mix Source: Development Association for Renewable Energy Industrial
Applications Industrial applications of LPG are extremely susceptible to the
cost of switching for the industrial consumer for example, many industries
textile industries in the north, which currently run on LPFO/diesel are
presently dis-incentivized from switching to LPG due to high tariffs and duties
on new LPG equipment required for the conversion, as well as VAT on LPG as  fuel
yet, once the switch is achieved, LPG is actually  cheaper and cleaner fuel for
those industries This highlights just one of the issues facing industrial
applications of LPG In agriculture, several uses of LPG that would stimulate
this sector include: pasteurization of dairy products; drying of grain and crop;
meat, poultry and fish product sanitization; chick hatching etc Table : Energy
Equivalence of LPG Energy Equivalence 1kg of LPG Electricity kWh Firewood  – kg
Charcoal – kg Petrol 25 litres Diesel 30 litres Natural Gas Source: NLPGA 40 –
50 cu ft Ministry of Petroleum Resources 77 Nigeria National Gas Policy Electric
Power Applications The NLPGA estimates that between  and  million tonnes per
annum of LPG is currently not recovered from flared gas, which is equivalent to
over ,000 MW of power generation, or  similar amount of imported liquid fuels
(petrol, diesel and/or kerosene) displaced if utilized in autogas Nigeria flares
annually  and  million tonnes of LPG in its flared gas volumes This is more than
enough to: • Generate about ,000 MW daily of electricity; • Displace  to
million litres of diesel daily; • Substitute  MMscfd of natural gas equivalent
in industries such as those in Kaduna, Kano etc; or • Preserve upwards of  –
million tonnes of wood annually in our forests Despite the potential of LPG as
fuel source, there  few applications of LPG-to- Power in Nigeria In order to
drive this sector, the present dearth of equipment such as LPG generators, bulk
storage tanks, vaporisers etc will need to be addressed, requiring  review of
the electric power tariff order to include LPG use and the introduction of
appropriate fiscal and other incentives to encourage investors to choose LPG
over other forms of fuel for their power plants Improve Access by the Poorest
and Reduce Desertification The government intends to kick-start the market for
LPG among the poorest who are currently using kerosene and firewood, which are
dangerous to health and destructive on the environment, contributing to
desertification This will be through pilot schemes combined with behaviour
change programmes The government intends to introduce pilot programmes (at least
two, one in the north and one in the south) of free handouts of small LPG
cylinders, cookers and basic supply, with consumers expected thereafter to pay
for further supplies of LPG fuel These will be combined with behaviour change
programmes among consumers Goals & Objectives of the LPG Policy The government
policy for LPG in Nigeria is to ensure the development of  strong and rapidly
growing LPG market in Nigeria This will include action to ensure that:
infrastructure challenges are addressed;  market at import jetties are opened up
to enable third party access;  port clearance is improved;  entry cost for
consumers is minimised; Ministry of Petroleum Resources 78 Nigeria National Gas
Policy  the entry of more players into the market is encouraged;  the
effectiveness and operations of PPMC is reviewed and PPMC restructured;  free
unregulated pricing are maintained, whilst ensuring ensure price publication and
price monitoring;  the regulatory environment is improved, particularly
regarding enforcement of safety regulations and discouraging the practice of
shortselling;  the fiscal environment is improved to provide at least equality
of treatment for domestic producers; customer education / awareness programmes
are launched; access by the poorest is improved The overall goal of the policy
on LPG is to promote its wider use in Domestic, Power generation, Autogas and
industrial applications the attainment of Five Million towards (,000,000) MT
utilisation in  years It is estimated that about $38 bn could be generated for
the economy if 50% of the current kerosene and firewood users switch over to LPG
by 2018, creating along with it, over one million skilled jobs in various
segments of the LPG supply value chain In the same vein, the utilisation of LPG
can also generate far reaching positive outcomes for our public health and
environment as well as saving cost for government at all tiers Development Model
for Domestic LPG Market With  view to successfully ensuring the transformation
of the LPG sector,  number of strategies, listed below, under four thematic
groups namely Availability, Affordability, Accessibility and Acceptability, are
considered appropriate These are: Availability As  Medium term strategy,  blend
of 40% import content of cylinders and 60% local manufacturing content is
expected by the 3rd to 4th year of the policy while  target of 100%
manufacturing of local cylinders is expected to be achieved within  years To
support the goal of improving the development of LPG infrastructure such as
cylinder manufacturing plants, mini - gas plants/skid plants, gas plants and
trucks, an LPG Availability Gas Intervention Fund of Sixty Billion Naira
(N60,000,000,000) will be established by the Government With respect to autogas
penetration: The government intends to support LPG penetration, to set the
environment, help to develop fleet markets in some large cities and to ensure
adequate gas supply but the government does not intend to directly invest or
become operationally involved In order to improve availability, the Government
will stimulate the demand side to make LPG accessible This will Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 79 Nigeria National Gas Policy require fiscal incentives
such as reduction in tariffs and duties on LPG equipment Accessibility The
accessibility of LPG will require leveraging on existing distribution chains of
other industries (such as bottling and beverage industry) It will also involve
ensuring adequate permitting from town planners and the regulator to certify
(without undue delay) identified retail sites Acceptability The key target group
for the acceptability of LPG as  fuel of choice are low income and medium income
earners The penetration strategy for this group requires identifying and
engaging with key influencers amongst communities Examples of key influencers
are: • Traditional Rulers / Community Leaders; • Religious Leaders; • Women and
Market Associations; • Labour Union Leaders The government intends to kick-start
the market for LPG among the poorest who are currently using kerosene and
firewood, which are dangerous the environment, contributing to desertification
to health and destructive on Affordability The major reason for the low
consumption of LPG in Nigeria is affordability Firstly, there are  number of
financial disincentives in the current LPG system For example, VAT is levied on
domestic production of LPG and LPG cylinders but not on imported cylinders
(there were once two domestic cylinder manufacturers but these have both since
folded up due to the financial challenges) No other petroleum product in Nigeria
is subject to VAT In addition, LPG is the only fuel that is not only fully
deregulated but is also taxed (VAT is applied to domestic LPG but not to
imported LPG, putting domestic gas at  disadvantage to LPG imports) The
government intends to ensure that all petroleum products are treated in
fiscally equivalent manner, such that one product is not financially
disincentivised compared with another Secondly, the initial cost of acquiring an
LPG cooking pack (cylinders, stoves, regulators etc) as compared to other fuels
is higher Not only are the LPG cylinders specialised, but they are also
subjected to import taxes even though domestic production capacity is presently
limited This has contributed to the shortage of LPG cylinders with the estimated
number of cylinders in circulation within the country today at approximately
million units as compared to  minimum  requirement of 100 Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 80 Nigeria National Gas Policy million LPG cylinders in relation to
the population This is  barrier to the growth of the LPG market Due to  shortage
of local cylinder manufacturing capacity, the policy will promote the phased
injection of 20 million cylinders over  period of  years (for comparison the
Indonesian Programme comprised the injection of 60 million units) LPG Regulation
There are two main regulatory bodies responsible for the LPG sector, the
Standards Organisation of Nigeria (SON) and the Department of Petroleum
Resources (DPR) SON sets product standards while the DPR is the inspections and
compliance regulatory authority Lack of compliance with the existing regulations
which already exist is the major problem The government will ensure that the
single petroleum regulatory authority will be strengthened so that LPG
regulations and other regulations are enforced and complied with Governance
Structure There is  need for strong institutional roles to address the challenge
of growing the LPG market in order to create an enabling environment that would
attract investment National LPG Council Whilst ultimate responsibility for the
implementation of policy for the LPG sector rests with the Ministry of Petroleum
Resources, it is recognised that other agencies of Government have  critical
role to play in this regard As such an LPG Council, which is  multi–stakeholder
group led by the Vice-President will be established to serve as an interface
body between all the agencies of government and other stakeholders in respect of
policy issues relating to the LPG sector Task Forces In order for the LPG
Council to execute its role within the context of the four thematic topics
above, the LPG Council will be constituted into four specific task forces:
Availability Task Force: to focus on improving LPG supply and delivery The key
challenges in this area are finance and infrastructure related;  This will cost
minimum of Three Hundred and Fifty Billion Naira (N350,000,000,000) over the
duration of  years (cf several billion dollars for Indonesia) Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 81 Nigeria National Gas Policy  Accessibility Task Force: to
focus on improved distribution and development of channels to access consumers;
Acceptability Task Force:  Affordability Task Force: tasked with driving the
effort of reducing the cost of LPG equipment and accessories where the NLPGA has
already identified  number of regulatory and infrastructure related costs Role
of the Ministry of Petroleum Resources The Ministry of Petroleum Resources shall
have the responsibility to monitor and ensure the execution of this policy The
responsibility shall include but not limited to the following:  Constitute the
various MDAs, Associations and Parastatals bodies identified in this policy
within the National LPG Council under the various taskforces, where such MDAs,
Associations and Parastatals bodies would be most relevant;  Monitor the
progress of the implementation of the initiative;  Ensure coordination among the
Task Forces, implementing MDAs and the FGN;  Serve as the secretariat for the
LPG Council;  Evaluate the impact during the implementation phase;  Co-ordinate
all activities relative to the development of the domestic LPG market  Gaining
Regional African Markets  policy option for Nigeria is to strive to become the
hub for  regional interconnected gas market in West and Central Africa This is
long-term aim because: • Regional African gas markets are not yet big enough and
have to be grown over time; • As  first step, the challenges of managing
regional gas export through WAGP, need to be addressed and overcome The Nigerian
government intends to learn the lessons from WAGP and address them, and to look
for opportunities over the medium to long term to expand pipeline gas supplies
and LNG sales to neighbouring African countries  Financing Gas Projects Gas
projects need to be financed The policy is to encourage all types of project
financing but the Nigerian government direct project-financing role will be
minimal in future Ministry of Petroleum Resources 82 Nigeria National Gas Policy
DEVELOPING NATIONAL HUMAN RESOURCES  Current Nigerian Background Some Unique
Features Affecting Nigerian Local Content The need to develop Nigerian human
resources and methods for doing so, are described in the following sections Much
of that discussion applies to any national local content development plan
Nigeria though has some unique features in the petroleum sector which have to be
taken into account and considered when developing  local content strategy for
the nation Local Content in  Depressed Economy Nigeria is now in the depths of
major recession, and early recovery may be  challenge It is more difficult to
develop Nigerian local content in  low oil price environment where contractors
are cutting jobs Developing human resources in an environment of cutting human
resources is not easy Another issue, which is more fundamental, and which has
more impact in this current era of cost cutting, There is evidence that Nigerian
contractors make projects more expensive This is  more fundamental issue, which
has more impact in this current era of cost cutting Were it not for legislation,
project developers would rather import foreign workers and contractors, at
lower net cost to their operations  policy approach is to encourage indigenous
participation at competitive prices consistent with the law  Introduction Policy
Statement Developing Nigerian human resources, to build competencies and
capabilities to enable Nigerians take full responsibility in managing Nigeria’
gas resources Strategic Objectives  Enhancing the Implementation of the Nigerian
Content Act;  Building competence across the gas industry;  Institutional human
capacity building for the public sector and industry;  Instilling international
oil and gas industry best practice in maintenance and safety;  Implementing
Nigerian Content Policy Summary of Provisions of the Nigerian Content Act
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 83 Nigeria National Gas Policy The Nigerian Oil
and Gas Industry Content Development (NOGICD) Act, 2010 was enacted to ensure
better development of Nigerian skills and content The main concern was how to
increase the participation of Nigerians in the petroleum industry, which has
been characterised by large numbers of expatriates brought in to the country, at
executive and even technical levels NOGICD Act is an important step forward in
genuinely improving Nigerian content in the gas industry NCDMB has been set up
to manage this and can match its database of Nigerian content with operators’
plans for skills needs and training Route to Implementation Sometimes JV
partners state that they cannot comply with some provisions of the NOGICD Act
because the skills they seek are simply not available within the country The
most effective way to deal with this and to ensure compliance with the Act is to
take steps to make those skills indeed available within the country The human
resources part of the gas policy therefore revolves around developing local
content in petroleum skills and making that available within Nigeria The gas
policy will focus on developing competent workers, possibly through
apprenticeships  Building Industry Competency Competent Worker There are two
main ways in which skills can be acquired:  Formal training: whether long term
or short term, normally classroom based teaching;  Supervised experience: this
is practical experience in the workplace where training can be put into
practice, and which is certified by  competent supervisor  competent worker is
one who is:  Fully and formally trained; and  Qualified following examination
with certification from  reputable accredited training institute; and
Experienced with certified numbers (hours) of supervised experience in each of
the different areas of his trade or profession; and  Regularly updated with new
developments and techniques in his trade or profession and where necessary with
refresher courses (this is Continuous Professional Development, CPD);  Who is
certified and registered as  competent worker Ministry of Petroleum Resources 84
Nigeria National Gas Policy Competency training has become an important part of
professional training in many countries, and is central to much of training
thinking and provision  competency framework is  system of supervised and
monitored relevant practical on the job training and also mentoring Nigeria
needs  competency framework for the gas industry in Nigeria, operated nationally
and in collaboration with international or national bodies who are experts in
competency frameworks and their accreditation for the gas industry The
traditional way of developing competency is through apprenticeships Skills
Development There are four main areas for skills development:  Leadership: this
covers the strategic management and leadership skills required for senior
management and executive positions;  Management: this is general management
training for middle and senior management and covers the whole range of skills
needed to be an effective manager;  Engineering: this is graduate level
engineering, for university graduates, whether from Nigerian or international
universities;  Technical: this is technician level competency, suitable for
those with practical skills, for school leavers or those with some college
education Technical skills include, for example, wiring or installations, pipe
fitting or welding; International Education Obtaining good quality
qualifications are the first part of the competency framework The PTDF funds
several schemes to provide Nigerians with good quality qualifications, including
sending Nigerian graduates for university graduate and post- graduate training
abroad Under the gas policy this will continue National Education Nigerian
universities and colleges need to be encouraged to develop their abilities to
produce good quality graduates No matter how good  Nigerian University may
become, employers are likely to prefer qualifications from good quality
international universities (especially universities in the UK or USA and other
parts of Western Europe, Australia or New Zealand) Nevertheless, Nigerian
universities need to improve such that they can be competitive with the best
international universities for producing Nigerian graduates One way this could
be done (for example) is for  Nigerian university to run programmes in
collaboration with an international university, or even for the international
university to award their own degrees with the education delivered through
partner university in Nigeria This is  model which is being increasingly used in
other parts of the world, and will be considered by the Government Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 85 Nigeria National Gas Policy There should also be
collaboration among Nigerian universities and other educational institutions,
government and the industry to develop skills which are relevant and necessary
for the industry Technical & Vocational and Educational & Training TVET
Technical & Vocational and Educational & Training (TVET) is training and
education for post - 16 school leavers This includes apprenticeships Nigeria has
had  good record for TVET historically, with technical skills accredited by the
City & Guilds of the UK Since approximately the 1980s though, technical training
has lapsed significantly There is now  large gap in the level of technical
skills provision in the country, such that IOCs complain that they cannot even
find petroleum welders (for example) and have to bring them in on expatriate
packages from abroad (the costs of which are charged to the JV) The gas policy
recognises the need for technical training, and one of the objectives of the gas
policy is to improve the level of technical training within Nigeria Supervised
Experience As already mentioned, university degrees and technical qualifications
are not enough There is also need to gain supervised practical experience before
such personnel can be called competent International accreditation bodies have
approached the development of competences in several main ways:  International
accreditation institutes (such as City and Guilds or the Gas Industry
Apprenticeship Framework, both in the UK) accredit training organisations who
provide approved courses;  Alternatively, international accreditation institutes
(the Institute of Engineering and Technology for example) do not accredit
training, but instead they accredit organisations (companies) to provide
competency based approach to enable engineers attain supervised practical
experience that enables them to attain  Chartered Engineer status;  In some
cases, an international accreditation institute could approve existing courses
In order for competency development to work, there needs to be  large and
dedicated group of experienced supervisors who can supervise and accredit the
practical work experience of the students These are people who are recognised
internationally as competent who are working in the industry Nigeria will need
to ensure that there are sufficient numbers of competent workers in the industry
who can act as supervisors for trainees or apprentices In other words,  “train
the trainers” programme will need to be set up to develop accredited work
experience Ministry of Petroleum Resources 86 Nigeria National Gas Policy It is
feasible and essential to set up  competency development framework for the
Nigerian gas industry It is recognised though that currently there are not
enough accredited experts to support  competency framework Gas Industry Expected
to Develop Competency Schemes While the Nigerian government will do what it can
to build the competency building approach in Nigeria, the industry is expected
to and will be encouraged to develop gas industry appropriate competency schemes
This may be together with public sector agencies The government will look to the
private sector gas industry to develop competent worker schemes Competent worker
schemes may take the form of apprenticeships The project-based training of the
NCDMB also provides  good model that could be expanded across the industry
Because of their international experience and expertise in this, the
international oil and gas companies are expected to be proactive in developing
industry wide schemes The government needs to make it clear to the industry what
is expected from the industry participants, particularly the international gas
companies The industry for their part are expected to put in place schemes to
ensure that competent gas workers are produced and made available to work on
projects in Nigeria Initially competent worker schemes will be voluntary and not
mandated by government If however, insufficient progress is being seen to be
achieved, the government will introduce mandatory measures to ensure the gas
industry installs competency or apprenticeship schemes  Institutional Capacity
Building Whilst clear legislation is required to move the industry forward, it
is recognised that legislation alone will not work  competent policy and
regulatory team, knowledgeable across engineering, finance, law, and related
disciplines etc is also essential for the implementation of the policy and the
law As well as building expertise in the national gas industry, gas expertise
also needs to be built in the public sector, in the regulatory agencies and the
Ministry of Petroleum Resources The government is aware of the need to build
institutional and human capacity and intends to work with industry, educational
partners and international development partners to achieve this objective in
Introducing  Maintenance and  Safety Culture Among the most important milestones
for the sustainable development of the gas sector is to install the highest
international best practice standards of maintenance, Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 87 Nigeria National Gas Policy health and safety Recent progress in
the privatised power industry show the improvements that can be made in  short
time when new management techniques are introduced The gas policy will insist on
the best international maintenance and safety practices being introduced and
applied throughout the gas industry The gas policy intends to bring about
legislation that will make Directors liable to criminal prosecution if they or
their company employees knowingly allowed severe safety lapses that lead to
serious damage, injury or death to premises, people or the environment Ministry
of Petroleum Resources 88 Nigeria National Gas Policy COMMUNICATIONS
Introduction Communications are important parts of any gas policy There are two
fundamental purposes for communication of the gas policy to all stakeholders in
Nigeria and abroad:  Explaining the policy;  Changing attitudes The Nigerian
people, industry, international investors, even members of the government
itself, have to  certain extent, become sceptical or cynical about reforms in
the energy sector On numerous occasions there have been pronouncements from
various parts of government announcing an end to power shortages or fuel crises,
but with no apparent change There also exists  gulf and lack of understanding
between investors and government of their respective expectations and
obligations Government will develop an appropriate communications strategy,
which will explain to all stakeholders the purpose, intent, thinking and
analysis behind the gas policy Audiences need to understand that the gas policy
is not  promise of when the lights will stay on Instead it is to show that the
Nigerian government is clear on what it wants to achieve, the reasons why and
the steps to achieve the policy objectives The gas policy will be communicated
as  process to arrive at  long-term vision for the nation Internal
communications – audiences within government; • • External communications –
other stakeholders involved with the gas industry  Internal Communications
Ministry Policies succeed or fail through the efforts of the civil servants and
it is important that they are keen and active participants in the policy The
first task therefore is to explain the policy and its implications to
stakeholders within the Ministry of Petroleum Resources As the government body
directly responsible for implementing the gas policy, staff within the Ministry
need to be: • aware of the direction of the policy and the key parts of the
contents; • aware of what is required of them individually; • persuaded of the
benefits for the nation so that they can be motivated to work on its
implementation Ministry of Petroleum Resources 89 Nigeria National Gas Policy
Other Government Entities The same applies to other parts of government,
including parastatal organisations such as: • NNPC; • NGC; • Existing regulatory
bodies such as PPPRA, DPR etc  External Communications Communication to
Stakeholders External communications will be needed to the other stakeholders in
the Nigerian gas industry, covering: • The general public; • • Domestic
investors; • Civil society; • Donor community; • Other stakeholders
International investors; External communications to the general public and other
stakeholders will largely take the form of media presentations and interviews,
seminars, workshops, newsfeeds, websites, mass media and the like Gas Industry
Involvement and Consultations The gas industry in Nigeria has been involved in
the development of the gas policy, through their participation of industry fora,
such as the Nigerian Gas Association, the National Gas Flaring Committee, the
National Gas Requirement Working Committee, the OPTS and the Petroleum Club This
gas policy therefore, while driven by and led by the government, is  joint
production from the government and the gas industry community in Nigeria, with
domestic and international industry involvement Ministry of Petroleum Resources
90 Nigeria National Gas Policy ROADMAP AND ACTION PLAN  Summary of Philosophy
and Key Actions The philosophy of the action plan for the gas policy is for the
government to put the legislative and commercial framework in place and then let
the market develop by itself The government will set targets for market
development, monitor progress and take appropriate actions to ensure market
development takes place However, gas utilisation in Nigeria is ultimately up to
the private sector to deliver  roadmap and action plan for delivering the gas
policy is set out with different scales for the types of activity: • Short term:
Months, up to one year; • Medium term: One to two years; • Long term: Longer
than two years The roadmap presented below sets out how the gas policy will be
implemented, according to the timescales and considering the activities and the
parties involved  Critical Policy Milestones There are critical milestones
within the gas policy that must be achieved for the policy to be effective These
include: • Stakeholder consultations; • Approval of the gas policy; • Enactment
of legislation; • Establishment of the new single independent petroleum
regulatory authority; • Producing PSC gas terms; • Completion of initial
infrastructure, namely the ELPS  loop and OB3 East- West link; • Achieving the
wholesale market / Willing Buyer – Willing Seller market status as rapidly as
possible; • Substantial progress towards industry wide restructuring Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 91 Nigeria National Gas Policy  Short-Term Activities
(Months) – Institutional Level Timescale: Months (up to one year) Institutional
Scope: The short-term activities are those that can commence very soon and can
reasonably be expected to be completed within  matter of months and within  year
Those short-term activities which the Ministry of Petroleum Resources can start
immediately are those within its direct control, namely institutional activities
within the Ministry of Petroleum Resources and NNPC Table : Roadmap, Short Term
(Months), Institutional Strategic Role Gas policy approval Activities • Ministry
consultation • Wider government, industry and other stakeholder consultation
Parties Involved MPR Gas Policy Team MPR Gas industry GACN NCDMB PTI PTDF MPR
Gas Policy Team MPR NCDMB MPR Gas Policy Team MPR DPR PPPRA NCDMB National
Assembly MPR Gas Policy Team MPR DPR NGPTC PPPRA GACN NNPC Industry MPR / DPR
NNPC Gas industry GACN NCDMB MPR Gas Policy Team NNPC/NGMC NLNG LPGA DPR PPPRA
GACN • Presidential approval • Gazette the agreed and approved gas policy
Communications strategy • Internal communications • External communications
Legislation • Draft petroleum legislation • Establish single independent
petroleum regulatory authority Downstream gas regulations • Draft an appropriate
network code • DSOs PSC Gas Terms • Develop PSC Gas Terms • Present the PSC Gas
Terms to Industry • Finalise PSC gas terms Studies and policies • Develop Gas
Resource Management Plan • Natural gas market study • GBI strategy • Gas for
development strategy and markets study Ministry of Petroleum Resources 92
Nigeria National Gas Policy Strategic Role Activities • Parties Involved NCDMB
&PIC PPMC Identify clusters and gas supply to clusters • Prepare detailed
national LNG strategy • Develop LPG penetration strategy and action plan •
Revise and clarify gas pricing framework • Develop tariff methodologies for
infrastructure • Scoping study for new single independent petroleum regulatory
authority Gas flare commercialisation programme MPR Gas Policy Team MPR DPR GACN
NNPC MPR Gas Policy Team MPR DPR PPPRA NNPC NGMC NGPTC • FGN / Industry
consultation mechanism • Gas Flare Commercialisation Study • Workshops •
Downstream Identify and concretise gas supply sources for OB3 Pipeline •
Progress mature offshore PSC gas projects • Progress mature onshore gas projects
Identify small-scale gas flare capture projects and develop selection criteria
for investors Identify - infrastructure and gas supply projects for fast-track
implementation • • Institutional restructuring MPR Gas Policy Team MPR NNPC PTI
PTDF NCDMB • Restructuring within MPR • Restructure and complete unbundling of
NGC Institutional capacity building and training in MPR and sector regulator •
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 93 Nigeria National Gas Policy  Medium-Term
Activities (One to Two Years) – Regulatory Timescale: One to two years Scope:
Regulatory and Institutional Medium-term activities are those which are largely
(but not completely) within the control of the Ministry but which will take
little longer to complete These are mainly those activities in the legislative
and regulatory areas, which set the framework for the gas industry and market to
grow Table : Roadmap, Medium Term (One to Two Years), Regulatory Strategic Role
International reviews Activities • Parties Involved MPR MPR Gas Policy Team
International LNG and gas markets study • Regional African market study –
identify markets for Nigerian LNG Legislation MPR MPR Gas Policy Team National
Assembly • Enact petroleum legislation (Petroleum Industry Reform Bill) • Enact
Petroleum (Fiscal Reform) Bill MPR Gas Policy Team Petroleum regulator MPR
Regulation • Complete establishment of petroleum regulator • Develop petroleum
and gas regulations • Develop technical codes and standards • Finalise and
implement network code • Cost benchmarking for facilities • Tariff modelling •
Pricing regulations • Market and price monitoring system • Transitional pricing
• Standard licence templates Fiscal policy MPR Gas Policy Team MPR MPR Gas
Policy Team MPR LPGA • Fiscal principles / framework • Fiscal rules • LPG pilot
projects for poor (replace Studies and policies wood and kerosene) • Alternative
fuels strategy – CNG, domestic LNG • Supply chain and blockages • Identify other
gas projects and selection criteria for investors Ministry of Petroleum
Resources 94 Nigeria National Gas Policy MPR Policy Team Petroleum regulator
MPR, NNPC Institutional • Set National Petroleum Policy Directorate within MPR
Initial appointments Implementation of single independent petroleum regulatory
authority • • • Scope  competent worker / apprenticeship scheme Institutional
capacity building and training in MPR and sector regulator • MPR Gas Policy Team
MPR Gas flare commercialisation programme • Gas flare Commercialisation strategy
study • Gas flare Commercialisation Programme Implementation Implement gas
industry restructuring MPR Gas Policy Team Petroleum regulator Industry
restructuring • • Enable wholesale gas market mechanisms • Fine tune tariff
methodologies MPR Gas Policy Team NNPC Upstream • Implement Gas Resource
Management Plan • Develop portfolio management methodologies • Tighten database
of all reserves, production, type, facilities, access to market etc (also useful
for gas flaring programme) • Gas management model • • • • Update the Gas
Infrastructure Inland basins commercial terms Identify offshore resources
Identify access to low cost gas Blueprint • Summit for marginal field cluster
gas development • Ensure gas supply contracts for OB3 Infrastructure MPR Gas
Policy Team MPR Contractors Gas industry and investors • Complete and commission
OB3 pipeline link • Make progress on AKK pipeline • Resolve Assa North and Ohaji
South gas development Implement - infrastructure and gas supply projects •
Ministry of Petroleum Resources 95 Nigeria National Gas Policy • Design and
implement LPG infrastructure plan Ministry of Petroleum Resources 96 Nigeria
National Gas Policy  Long-Term Activities (Over Two Years) – Industry Timescale:
Over two years Scope: Industry After two years, the legislative, regulatory,
institutional and commercial framework will be in place The gas industry will
then need to step up and implement the policy in terms of infrastructure
projects and growing the Nigerian domestic and export gas market Table :
Roadmap, Long-Term (Over Two Years), Industry Strategic Role Activities
Communications strategy Parties Involved MPR Gas Policy Team MPR • Identify
potential strategic partners Upstream MPR Gas Policy Team NNPC Gas Industry and
investors • Bring on new gas from dedicated gas fields from inland and offshore
basins LNG MPR Gas Policy Team NNPC • Implement LNG downstream strategy
Infrastructure MPR Gas Policy Team MPR Contractors Gas industry and investors •
Complete and commission AKK pipeline • Build gas transmission backbone
infrastructure Downstream MPR Gas Policy Team Petroleum regulator Gas Industry
and investors • Complete establishment of wholesale gas market Institutional MPR
Gas Policy Team Petroleum regulator MPR, NNPC PTDF PTI • Institutional capacity
building and training Ministry of Petroleum Resources 97 Nigeria National Gas
Policy  Timeline The activities set out above are now set out in  single
timeline plotting activities and deadlines Figure 17: Timeline of Gas Policy
Roadmap First Six Months 2H 2016 Second Six Months 1H 2017 Year Three Plus Year
Two 2H 2017 1H 2018 Activity 2018 + SHORT TERM Gas policy approval • Ministry
consultation • • Presidential approval • Gazette the agreed and approved gas
policy Communications strategy Internal communications • • External
communications Legislation • Draft petroleum legislation • Agree PSC Gas Terms •
Establish single regulatory authority Downstream gas regulations • Develop
network code • Develop 2017 DSOs Studies and policies • Develop Gas Resource
Management Plan • Natural gas market study • GBI strategy • Gas for development
strategy and markets • Identify clusters and gas supply to clusters • Prepare
detailed national LNG strategy • Develop and agree LPG policy, market
penetration strategy and action plan Industry and wider stakeholder consultation
• Revise and clarify gas pricing methodology • Develop tariff methodologies for
infrastructure • Draft an appropriate network code • Scoping study for single
petroleum regulator • Policy re petroleum products & LPG Gas flare
commercialisation programme • FGN / Industry consultation mechanism • National
Gas flare commercialisation study • Workshops etc Downstream • Identify gas
supply sources for OB3 Pipeline Ministry of Petroleum Resources 98 Nigeria
National Gas Policy • Progress OML 133 gas development project • Progress OML 42
gas development project • Identify small scale gas projects and develop
selection criteria for investors Identify - infrastructure and gas supply
projects to implement quickly • Institutional restructuring • Restructuring of
gas within MPR • Restructure NNPC, separation of NGC • Institutional capacity
building and training MEDIUM TERM Legislation • Enact petroleum legislation
Regulation • Complete establishment of petroleum regulator • Develop petroleum
and gas regulations • Develop technical codes and standards • Finalise and
implement network code • Cost benchmarking for facilities • Tariff modelling •
Pricing regulations • Market and price monitoring system • Standard licence
templates Fiscal policy • Fiscal principles / framework • Prepare Draft
Petroleum (Fiscal Reform) Bill Studies and policies • LPG pilot projects for
poor • Alternative fuels strategy – CNG, LNG • Supply chain and blockages •
Institutional • Set up policy research centre within MPR • National gas focal
point – initial appointments • Scope competent worker scheme • Develop with
government and industry • Industry restructuring • • NNPC restructuring •
Separation of NGC • Enable wholesale gas market mechanisms • Fine tune tariff
methodologies Upstream • Implement Gas Resource Management Plan • Develop
portfolio management methodologies Identify other gas projects & selection
criteria Institutional capacity building and training Implement gas industry
restructuring Ministry of Petroleum Resources 99 Nigeria National Gas Policy •
Tighten database of all reserves, production • Gas management model • • Offshore
resources Identify access to low cost gas • • Update an infrastructure blueprint
• Summit for marginal field cluster gas Inland basins commercial terms
development • Ensure gas supply contracts for OB3 Gas flare out
commercialisation programme • Gas flare utilisation strategy study • Implement
Gas flare Commercialisation Programme Infrastructure • Complete and commission
OB3 pipeline link • Make progress on AKK pipeline • Resolve Assa North and Ohaji
South gas development Implement - infrastructure and gas supply projects • •
Design and implement LPG infrastructure plan LONG TERM Communications strategy •
Upstream • Bring on new gas dedicated gas fields from Identifying potential
strategic partners inland and offshore basins LNG • Infrastructure • Complete
and commission AKK pipeline • Build gas transmission backbone infrastructure
Downstream • Arrive at wholesale gas market Institutional • Set up investment
promotion support office • Develop health and safety culture • Implement LNG
downstream strategy Institutional capacity building and training Ministry of
Petroleum Resources 100