 DP/DCP/NGA/ United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for
Project Services Distr: General  December 2022 Original: English First regular
session 2023 30 January –  February 2023, New York Item  of the provisional
agenda Country programmes and related matters Country programme document for
Nigeria () Contents Chapter Page  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework……………  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………  Annex Results and resources framework for Nigeria
()…………………………………………  22-27499X () 081222 *2227499* DP/DCP/NGA/  UNDP within the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Nigeria has the
largest economy ($429 billion US dollars in 2020) and is the most populous (211
million in 2021) country in Africa Despite being the largest crude oil producer
in Africa, poverty (40 per cent or people million in 2019) and unemployment (33
per cent in 2021) remain high Nigeria ranked low in the Human Development Index
(161 out of 189 countries in 2020) The COVID-19 pandemic, cost-of-living crisis,
disruptions to supply chains, and drop in revenue all compounded national
development challenges The World Bank estimates the national poverty rate may
have increased to per cent (million) in Moreover, Nigeria suffers from socio-
economic deficits where close to 60 per cent of the rural population still lack
access to electricity7 and only  per cent of the population uses clean energy
sources for cooking, with there being  disproportionate and negative impact on
women and girls  Nigeria is vulnerable to conflict-related and environmental
risks (desertification and natural disasters) Governance, peace, and security
deficits (102 out of 104 countries in the Chandler Good Government Index, 34 out
of 54 countries in the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance, 154 out 180
countries in the 2021 Transparency International Corruption Perception Index,
and 143 out of 163 on the 2022 Global Peace Index) constitute direct threats to
development and citizen trust in Nigerian public institutions and policies
Nigeria ranks 180 out of 193 countries in the world on women’ representation in
parliament with only  per cent of female legislators in the House of
Representatives and  per cent in the Senate Nigeria also scored low on the
gender development index (863) and the gender inequality index (680) in Female
labour force participation is low at per cent and the maternal mortality ratio
is high (917) Furthermore, the pandemic intensified already  high incidence of
gender-based violence (GBV), which is currently 48 per cent  The Common Country
Assessment (CCA) identifies key opportunities in agriculture, manufacturing, and
regional trade alongside challenges such as vulnerability to oil shocks,
increasing pressures on poverty, inequality, unemployment, hunger, malnutrition,
and gender imbalances To meet the ambitious national targets of generating 21
million full-time jobs and lifting 35 million people out of poverty by 2025 the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) for
Nigeria 2023–2027 places people at the centre of development through an
inclusive, rights-based, gender-sensitive approach to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) The UNSDCF features four strategic priorities, ()
inclusive economic growth and development, (ii) improved environmental
conditions and increased resilience, (iii) increased access and use of quality
basic social services, and (iv) promote  peaceful, inclusive, and cohesive
society  Anchored in the 2030 Agenda and African Union Agenda 2063, and drawing
lessons from the mid-term review of the  Country Programme Document (CPD), the
new CPD for 2023– 2027 represents UNDP contributions to Government of Nigeria
development efforts and UNDSCF The CPD is aligned to the National Development
Plan 2021–2025, which aims to foster socio- economic recovery, and restore
macroeconomic stability, good governance, and growth through socio-economic
transformation for sustainable development The CPD was informed by the analysis
and recommendations from the Independent Country Programme Evaluation (ICPE)
These include adopting  balanced mix of upstream and downstream interventions
where gender considerations are adequately mainstreamed; enhancing peace
building and stabilization  International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook
database, April Estimates by United Nations Population Fund, World Population
Dashboard  British Petroleum, Statistical Review of World Energy, National
Bureau of Statistics, 2019 and UNDP, Human Development Report, World Bank,
Nigeria Development Update, Sustainable Energy for All, Africa Hub  UNDP, Human
Development Report for 2021/Gender-based violence in Nigeria during the COVID-19
crisis: the shadow pandemic, Brief  May 2020, UN Women /16  DP/DCP/NGA/
programmes; enabling public‑private partnerships and climate change mitigation
with well- articulated strategies, and ensuring sustainability of results at the
end of programme implementation10 In achieving targets laid out in the UNDSCF
and based on the UNDP mandate and comparative advantage, the CPD focuses on
three pillars: () inclusive economic growth, (ii) climate change, and (iii)
governance, peace, and security These three pillars will collectively assist in
addressing some of the multi-faceted and multidimensional challenges identified
in the UNDSCF, including rising unemployment, low productivity, public financial
resource constraints, food insecurity, violence and conflict, displacement of
people, limited social protection mechanisms, low public accountability and
transparency, and environmental degradation by promoting inclusive and rights-
based development processes that leave no one behind II Programme priorities and
partnerships  The UNDP programmatic response in Nigeria has two objectives:
socio-economic recovery in the medium term and structural transformation for
inclusive and sustainable development to achieve the SDGs by This is translated
into the three linked priorities of inclusive growth, climate change, and
governance, peace, and security Adhering to the principle of “Leaving No One
Behind” gender equality and empowerment will be prioritized along with
vulnerable groups, poor, female- headed households, and people living with
disabilities UNDP will mainstream volunteerism into programme implementation
strategies as  valuable way of achieving the SDGs by The programme is flexible
and responsive to addressing emerging issues and reflect extensive
collaborations with multiple stakeholders  The UNDP CPD for 2023 to 2027
contributes to the United Nations development system (UNDS) overall objective in
the UNDSCF that promotes inclusive human-rights based and gender- sensitive
development in Nigeria for the acceleration and achievement of the 2030 Agenda
and African Union Agenda As such, UNDP will contribute to UNDS outcomes in the
UNDSCF, by focusing on () establishing  strong foundation for  diversified and
inclusive economy, (ii) building  solid framework and enhancing capacities to
consolidate peace, strengthen security and social cohesion and ensure good
governance, and (iii) enhancing capacities for climate resilience and
sustainable access to energy  The theory of change for the CPD is based on
assumptions that these objectives can be achieved IF Nigeria has sustained
inclusive economic growth and development that provides equitable opportunities
for decent employment and livelihoods, and IF people living in Nigeria,
particularly the most vulnerable, enjoy improved environmental conditions and
increased resilience to extreme weather conditions and disasters, and IF more
inclusive, participatory, transparent and gender sensitive governance, justice
and human rights systems are in place at all levels to promote peaceful,
inclusive and cohesive society, and ASSUMING policy reforms, including
strategies and plans are developed and implemented effectively, upcoming
elections do not disrupt programme implementation, rising insecurity within
Nigeria and the Sahel region is under control, THEN all people living in Nigeria
especially the most vulnerable, will contribute to and benefit from inclusive
rights-based and gender sensitive development that leads to the acceleration and
achievement of the 2030 Agenda and SDGs  The programme will focus on each of
these directions to achieve greater development outcomes by integrating gender
equality and strengthening partnerships with international financial
institutions (IFIs), donors, and the private sector to generate meaningful and
impactful programmatic interventions Efforts will be facilitated by  greater
focus on three enablers: Strategic innovation, digitization, and development
financing These chosen pathways are considered the best solutions for addressing
development challenges in Nigeria, in part, considering the comparative
advantage of UNDP in terms of convening power, strategic position, integrator
role and its expertise in thematic areas such as human development, development
financing, inclusive growth, environment, governance and peace building as
evidenced by continuous engagement with key 10 ICPE Nigeria 2022 (summarized
recommendations) /16  DP/DCP/NGA/ stakeholders including the government and
donors UNDP will work closely with United Nations agencies drawing lessons
learned during the COVID-19 pandemic Taking note of CPD evaluation findings,
UNDP will make greater efforts transparent engagement and programme
implementation, fostering improved understanding amongst UNDS partners, and
collaborating in thematic areas where possible, based on respective comparative
advantages in  Inclusive economic growth To contribute to UNDSCF Priority Area
on sustainable and inclusive growth, UNDP will support development planning; SDG
mainstreaming and implementation in strategic plans and policies at federal and
state levels; policy reforms guided by international best practices, economic
analyses, and forecasting; data generation; inclusive finance and impact
investments; leveraging the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA)
agreement, entrepreneurship development and employment creation through the SDG
innovation Hub, Office of the Senior Special Assistant to the President on SDGs
(OSSAP-SDGs), Innovate United Kingdom Knowledge Transfer Network (KTN), the
United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) and the private sector, and the
Accelerator Lab on agriculture and value chain development (especially involving
women and youth) Aims are to achieve inclusive economic growth by strengthening
capacities for generating and analyzing disaggregated data, especially at the
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) and state statistical offices, supporting
resilience-building to minimize risk, improving livelihood and employment
creation by leveraging the Nigeria Jubilee Fellows Programme, and scaling up
social protection measures such as cash transfers in targeted communities in
partnership with the World Food Programme (WFP) and UNICEF Development financing
challenges faced by Nigeria have driven UNDP to partner with the government,
European Union, International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and other primary
stakeholders in supporting the development of  healthy financial ecosystem
through an Integrated National Financial Framework (INFF) and related economic
policy reforms and institutional changes The launch of the INFF, partly through
South-South cooperation, will see Nigeria exchange lessons learned with other
African countries on its successful INFF process In addition, UNDP will
prioritize SDG impact investments in partnership with the national advisory
board, Impact Investment Foundation (IIF), German Development Agency (GIZ),
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and global investors,
as well as insurance risk financers in collaboration with the Financial Sector
Deepening Africa (FSD Africa) and Insurance Development Forum (IDF) It will
engage in high-level policy advocacy through the United Nations Nigeria Policy
Advisors group, economic analysis and forecasting to inform effective policy
choices by all stakeholders Environmental sustainability, climate change, and
resilient development UNDP, as the lead agency on clean energy and climate
action under Priority Area  of the UNSDCF, will look to mitigate climate change
and empower communities by focusing on strengthening the nexus between economic
growth, environmental protection, and security, relying on strategic
partnerships with the Office of the Vice President, National Climate Change
Council of Nigeria (NCCCN), Ministry of Finance, Budget, and National Planning
(MFBNP), Office of the Security Advisor (OSA), Federal Ministry of Environment
(FME), Development Bank of Nigeria (DBN), Infrastructure Bank of Nigeria, and
Bank of Industry Climate-security nexus hubs piloted in the northwest of
Nigeria, in partnership with development partners like the governments of Norway
and Germany, will be leveraged and scaled to foster resilience to shocks UNDP
will support the Government of Nigeria to achieve its objective of greening the
economy using  set of integrated solutions as per five pathways ) Supporting
implementation of Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) towards net zero
and climate resilience using  broad range of policy options and leveraging the
Montreal Protocol implementation Partnerships will be deepened with the British
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO), United States Agency for
International /16  DP/DCP/NGA/ Development (USAID), UNICEF, World Bank, and Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), tapping into innovation, advocacy, and
capacity-building abilities ) Strengthening mitigation measures to climate
security risks by enhancing local capacities for proactive de-escalation of
conflicts, stabilization, and recovery through youth engagement in peacebuilding
and climate resilience This also includes greening the Sahel for sustainable
peace in alliance with the Office of the National Security Adviser and providing
platforms for scaling climate-peace hubs ) Accelerating nature-based sustainable
livelihoods for protecting biodiversity and ecosystem services through the
adoption of integrated, effective, protected area management, enforcement, and
sustainable land use agroecological approaches, especially targeting women and
youth by leveraging the UNDP-led Global Biodiversity programme alongside the
World Bank and FAO ) Promoting risk-informed green and circular economic
development through emission trading schemes, scaling up access to clean and
affordable energy, enhancing de- carbonization, de-risking private investments
and off-grid clean energy technologies for productive uses through blended
finance, and focusing on rural populations, people affected by conflict or
crisis, women and girls, people living with disabilities, and youth in
collaboration with the national Rural Electrification Agency, Energy Commission
of Nigeria, and African Development Bank ) Enhancing communication and data-
driven ecological stewardship for strengthened dialogue between government,
civil society, and the private sector Governance, peace and security  leading
organization in the development of the UNSDCF, UNDP supports improved public
confidence in key institutions of governance, enhances accountability, public
sector transparency, security and conflict management, and promotes inclusive
governance, access to justice and the protection of fundamental rights As such,
partnerships with civil society organizations (CSOs), the private sector, and
professional bodies will be nurtured to support engendering progressive views on
public accountability and transparency, peacebuilding, elections, gender
equality and social cohesion, and scaling up local governance systems UNDP will
enhance the capacities of the national assembly and primary public finance and
anti-corruption agencies to enact public finance and anti-corruption legal
frameworks, collaborate with and empower CSOs, women, and youth groups for
constructive and effective engagement on anti-corruption UNDP will support
efforts aimed at promoting equitable and timely access to justice and strengthen
human rights institutions by investing in integrated digital solutions;
encouraging the elimination of impunity regarding the violation of human rights
and gender-based violence; facilitating domestication of all international and
regional human rights treaties; promoting elimination of inconsistencies between
customary practices and statutory laws, and supporting implementation of
international and regional human rights recommendations and reporting
obligations in partnership with the National Human Rights Commission, Ministry
of Justice and relevant rule of law institutions UNDP will prioritize electoral
reforms and the implementation of the 2022 electoral law for improved election
management and expanded democratic space UNDP will promote integrated responses
to insecurity, linking peacebuilding, climate action and livelihood recovery to
conflict prevention and stabilization Infrastructure for peace, equipped with
functional capacities for the early detection of conflict risks, will be
strengthened in collaboration with other UNDS partners, CSOs, traditional and
religious leaders to promote inclusive dialogue, build consensus, and diffuse
societal conflicts UNDP will enhance the capacities of security and governance
institutions, expanding options for safe return and reintegration while laying
the foundation for sustainable peace and national security To address cross
border governance challenges, including the proliferation of small arms, violent
extremism, organised crime, and illegal migration UNDP will collaborate on joint
/16  DP/DCP/NGA/ programming with neighbouring country offices, Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Lake Chad Basin Commission, UNDS
stakeholders, development partners, and CSOs on area-based responses and cost
sharing arrangements to maximize impact UNDP, to ensure connections across
security, economic, environment, and governance pillars will work with other
United Nations partners on preventing and responding to GBV, promote women’
participation in peace processes and security efforts, and improve the
integration of gender equality into natural resource management and disaster
preparedness plans and processes Furthermore, UNDP will promote South-South and
triangular cooperation with stakeholders from Kenya, Germany, and China in
governance thematic areas like police reform and elections to deepen best
practices and exchange knowledge with ECOWAS UNDP will work with national
partners at federal and state levels, as well as UN Women, UNFPA, and UNICEF, in
building national capacities to ensure gender equality is mainstreamed such that
it contributes to policy reforms that address the barriers to women’ empowerment
UNDP will support strengthening government capacities on gender-sensitive
economic policies, innovations, planning, and the use of gender-disaggregated
data to strengthen efforts that empower women and leverage advantages to better
respond to sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) by supporting national and
local partners in developing, strengthening and implementing the required
legislative frameworks and building more gender-sensitive legal and judicial
institutions This will involve UNDP strengthening the evidence base to inform
strategies to advance women’ empowerment and gender equality, and support the
country in producing nationwide data on SGBV for programming, analysis, and
policymaking purposes in partnership with the Federal Ministry of Women Affairs
UNDP will deepen partnerships with development partners, namely the European
Union, governments of Germany, Japan, Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands, Korea,
Canada, the United Kingdom, United States, and Global Environmental Facility
(GEF) and establish new ones with international financial institutions like the
World Bank, African Development Bank (AfDB), and the Islamic Development Bank
Cognizant of the vibrancy of the private sector in Nigeria in innovation,
development financing, impact investments, ease of doing business, job creation,
climate action and inclusive governance UNDP will further strengthen engagement
with the private sector to build more ambitious and effective partnerships
Collaborative opportunities will be explored with multilateral environmental
financing institutions to scale up engagements with United Nations funds like
the Peacebuilding Fund, Human Security Trust Fund, and the Joint SDG Fund
Moreover, UNDP will develop long-term partnerships with think tanks, chambers of
commerce, innovation hubs, and research institutions and foster lasting
technical collaborative relationships with CSOs III Programme and risk
management This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level In
accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/, UNDP will systematically ensure
all direct costs associated with project implementation are charged to concerned
projects In addition, UNDP will review structures and procedures to ensure they
are “fit for purpose” when implementing the programme and agile enough to adapt
to evolving contexts, United Nations reform actions and the new UNDP Strategic
Plan for 2022–The programme will be nationally executed as per the Harmonized
Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) and in coordination with other United Nations
Specialized Agencies to manage financial risks and strengthen national execution
capacities In exceptional circumstances, national execution may be replaced by
direct execution in response to force majeure UNDP direct implementation will
safeguard accountability in complex programming situations that is backed by
conscious data collection and analysis, and aligned with effective risk
management, evidence generation, and adaptive programmatic implementation
National ownership and mutual /16  DP/DCP/NGA/ accountability for development
results will be strengthened through joint annual work plans and reviews aligned
with national priorities Risks associated with the management of political
leadership transitions, including elections, could derail smooth implementation
of the programme Unrest or tensions related to elections could further polarize
the operating environment, while protracted election processes could lead to the
unavailability of senior government officials with implications for the pace of
realizing programme priorities in various locations To mitigate risks, UNDP will
adopt an electoral-cycle approach providing support to key stakeholders before,
during and after the elections In addition, UNDP will deploy  robust risk
management system to ensure adaptive programming strategies, direct
implementation and working with strategic partners including civil society and
volunteers so they have timely information that will lead to quick and
meaningful programmatic decisions prior to, during, and after the elections
Economic and social challenges may affect the successful implementation of the
programme Risks include, () prolonged economic slowdown if proposed strategies
for economic stabilization are not implemented; (ii) limited capacity of
government and national stakeholders to implement programmes; (iii) protracted
crises in the north, south-east, Niger Delta, and the middle belt; (iv)
difficulties in mobilizing adequate resources; () protracted COVID-19 related
disruptions, and (vi) potential delivery challenges prior to and during the 2023
general elections Moreover, lack of political will, inadequate allocation of
resources, and adverse societal perceptions on gender equality, especially
leadership and decision-making related interventions, could lead to risks
relating to gender inequality and the situation of women and girls The
mitigation of programme risks has been built into priorities and interventions
To ensure sustainability and effectiveness in the delivery of development and
humanitarian assistance, UNDP will focus on strengthening the capacities of
government and implementing partners through  HACT modality This approach
includes  macro-assessment of the public financial management system, and micro-
assessments of implementing partners Fast-track procedures will meet government
demands and ensure timely responses to crisis and emergency situations Surge
capacity and high-level advocacy, among other contingency measures, will be
considered to mitigate contextual and operational risks by drawing on UNDP
regional and global service hubs The UNDP partnership and resource mobilization
strategy will emphasize strengthening government capacities for domestic
resource mobilization and cost sharing at the state level UNDP will rely on its
newly approved status as  ‘cluster for asset’ management in the region Extensive
collaboration with the Regional Service Centre will be used to collect and
disseminate global best practices for South–South cooperation, innovation,
knowledge management and thought leadership IV Monitoring and evaluation CPD
monitoring and evaluation will be aligned with the UNSDCF Following independent
country programme evaluation, the focus will be on defining results and baseline
data and identifying reliable data sources for collection and use In line with
UNDP monitoring and evaluation guidelines, UNDP will also engage third-party
monitoring mechanisms for inaccessible areas Field visits and verifications will
increase in frequency to ensure targeted vulnerable groups benefit from
interventions UNDP will rely on nationally owned country-level data sources such
as the National Bureau of Statistics, Human Development Reports, and credible
global reports Data will be disaggregated by relevant groups where possible
UNDP—working with the United Nations Monitoring and Evaluation Reference Group,
third party monitors, joint field visits and partners—will support the national
statistical system and research institutions to enhance national data generation
capacities, and improve data quality and evaluation functions, and provide
evidence-based, gender-sensitive data that informs decision-making and fosters
transformational development approaches The focus will be on improving coverage
of SDG targets and strengthening the quality, reliability, and /16  DP/DCP/NGA/
timeliness of disaggregated data Performance indicators for projects and
programmes will be articulated to reflect changes on the ground and observable
and measurable in ways that are relevant to project beneficiaries Two per cent
of the country programme budget will be allocated to evaluation Project Quality
Assessments, including the gender marker, will continue to be used to achieve
corporate programming quality standards UNDP will participate in UNSDCF Results
Area Groups to track outcome indicators, including using the United Nations INFO
online tool for planning, monitoring, and reporting on national United Nations
development action The gender marker will be used to monitor expenditure and
improve gender-based planning and decision-making HACT, spot checks, and
financial audits will complement regular programme monitoring for stakeholders
The approved evaluation plan will be the basis for decentralized evaluations,
the next independent country programme evaluation, and the Cooperation Framework
evaluation /16  DP/DCP/NGA/ Annex Results and resources framework for Nigeria ()
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Nigeria National Development Plan (NDP) 2021–Policy
priority : Expand business growth, entrepreneurship, and industrialization (SDGs
, , ,  & 10) UNSDCF (OR EQUIVALENT) Strategic Priority  OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP
#: By 2027, Nigeria sustains inclusive economic growth and development that
provides equitable opportunities for decent employment and livelihoods RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN (2022–2025) OUTCOME : Structural transformation, particularly
green, inclusive, and digital transitions COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME
INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() Indicator : Unemployment rate, disaggregated by
sector, age, sex and persons living with disability Baseline: Total = % Male = %
Female = % Urban = % Rural = % Youth () = % DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA
COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) Job
Creation Survey, Q2 (Quarter ) and Q3 (Quarter ) Frequency: Biannually
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) Regular:
$292,500 Other: $,437,500 OUTPUT : Access to basic services and financial and
non-financial assets and services improved to support productive capacities for
sustainable livelihoods and jobs to achieve prosperity • European Union • GIZ •
Federal Ministry of Industry, Trade and Investment • Lagos State Indicator :
Number of jobs created for youths through vocational training, and empowerment
Baseline: Formal (male: 300, female: 300) Informal (male: 477, female: 487)
Target:10,000 (2025) Male: ,000 (formal ,500, informal ,500) Female ,000 (formal
,500, informal ,500) Data source: UNDP annual report Employment Trust Fund
(LSETF) • Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of Nigeria (SMEDAN)
Target: Total = % Male = 19% Female = 20% Urban = % Rural = % Youth () = 25% •
Senior Special Assistant to the President on SDGs (OSSAP)-SDGs • Imo, Abia, Edo,
Indicator : Number of women in the informal business sector () accessing basic
services and () finance Baseline: 300 Target: ,000 Data source: NBS Kwara, Kano,
and Lagos State • United Nations Volunteers Indicator : Underemployment rate
disaggregated by age, sex and persons living with disability Baseline: Total = %
Male = % Female = % Urban = % Rural = %  /16 DP/DCP/NGA/ Youth = % Target: Total
= % Male = % Female = % Urban = % Rural = % Youth = % Indicator : Gross crop
production per capita index (=100) Baseline: 18 Target: 110 NBS Annual Abstract
of Statistics Frequency: Annually OUTPUT : Systems and services strengthened
across agriculture sector with increased investment Regular: $292,500 Other:
$,625,000 • FMARD • FMITI • FMMSD • Bill and Melinda Gates Federal Ministry of
Industry, Trade, and Investment (FMITI) Indicator : Number of value-chain
enabling strategies supported in the agriculture sector Baseline:  Target:  Data
source: FMARD Foundation • World Bank • UNDP • AfDB • Japan International
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD) Cooperation Agency
Indicator : Number of entrepreneurs in the agricultural sector benefiting from
innovative skills and empowerment and development initiatives Baseline: 200
(male: 120; female: 80) Target: ,000,000 (male: 500,000; female: 500,000) Data
source: FMARD, Ministry of Mines and Steel Development (FMMSD) Annual Reports
OUTPUT : Policies enabled for inclusive and sustainable social protection
programmes to strengthen livelihood opportunities for the vulnerable • FAO •
Norway • Nigeria Extractive Frequency: Annually Industries Transparency
Initiative Regular: $292,500 Other: $,718,750 • Delta, Anambra, Niger, Taraba,
Cross-River and Akwa-Ibom State • African Union • Ministry of Finance, Budget,
and National Planning (MFBNP) Indicator : Number of policies and institutional
reforms to improve social protection coverage for the vulnerable Baseline:
Target:  Data source: National Annual Budget Report • UNICEF • NBS • OSSAP-SDGs
• ECOWAS • National Social Safety-Net Indicator : Number of Vulnerable
Households (VHH), MSMEs and start-ups supported with livelihood, and business
continuity, through cash transfers in selected Local Government Areas (LGAs)
across targeted states Coordinating Office (NASSCO) 10  DP/DCP/NGA/ Baseline:
(VHH: ,000; MSMEs ,000; Start-ups: 10) LGAs:  Target: (VHH: 20,000; MSMEs ,000;
Start-ups: 50) LGAs: 10 OUTPUT : National data collection, measurement, and
analytical systems strengthened using SDG-aligned state development plans and
systems Indicator : Annual budget allocation mainstreaming the SDGs to maximize
development impact Baseline:  in 2015 Target: 10 in 2022 NBS Social Sector
Surveys Regular: $292,500 Other: $,718,750 • OSSAP-SDGs • NBS • World Bank •
MFBNP • AfDB Frequency: Annually Indicator : Number of national or sub- national
development plans aligned to the SDG framework Baseline:  Target: 20 Data
source: OSSAP, SDG Progress Report Indicator : Number of strategies, policies
and regulatory frameworks developed and adopted by public and private actors to
achieve SDGs Baseline:  Target:  Data source: MBNP, NBS Indicator : Amount of
public and private finance leveraged to achieve SDGs Baseline: $95 million US
dollars Target: $200 million US dollars Data source: OSSAP, MBNP Outcome total
$15,670,000 NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: NDP 2021–2025: Environmental
sustainability (SDGs , , , 11, 12, 13 and 17) UNSDCF (OR EQUIVALENT) Strategic
Priority  OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2027, people living in Nigeria,
particularly the most vulnerable, have equitable access to affordable clean
energy, enjoy sustainable food systems, environmental conditions and increased
resilience to climate change and disasters RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN (2022–2025)
OUTCOME : Building resilience to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk
Indicator : Total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions per year Baseline: 347MtCOse
(2018) Target: 344MtCOse OUTPUT : The Paris Agreement and NDC frameworks
integrated in federal and state development plans Regular: $78,000 Other:
$11,000,000 • • Federal Ministry of Environment (FME) Explicit Congestion
Notification • Annual reports • NDC reports • • NCCCN • State ministries • NCS •
Norway Indicator : Number of federal MDAs and state that have policy measures in
place to enable the enhancement and/or implementation of Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) assessment reports  11 DP/DCP/NGA/ Nationally
Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement Baseline: Federal MDAs = ;
State =  Target: Federal MDAs = ; State =  Data source: FME • Monitoring,
reporting and verification reports • Multilateral Fund (MLF) • Germany • USAID
reports Indicator : Volume of ODP tonnes phased out in Nigeria Baseline: ODP
tonnes (2019) Target: 81 ODP tonnes Data source: FME OUTPUT : Institutional
systems to manage multi-dimensional risks and shocks strengthened at national
and sub-national levels Regular: $78,000 Other: $11,000,000 • FME • NCCCN •
Federal Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and Social
Development Indicator : Number of risk-informed development strategies and plans
in place at federal and state levels Baseline: Federal = ; State =  Target:
Federal = ; State =  Data source: NBS, FME Indicator : Number of gender-
responsive conflict sensitive development policies, cross- border initiatives,
plans, or institutions in place to prevent risk of conflict, including climate
security Baseline:  Target:  Data source: FME; NCCCN OUTPUT : Increased access
to capital/credit to set up  clean energy business by women Regular: $78,000
Other: $15,000,000 • FME • NCCCN • Energy Commission of Nigeria Indicator :
Percentage of capital grants allocated to women-led private entrepreneurs in
off-grid renewable energy technology (RET) Baseline:  Target: 30% Data source:
FME Indicator : Number of people, who gained access to clean, affordable, and
sustainable energy Baseline: Male=,000, Female=,280 12  DP/DCP/NGA/ Target:
=10,000, =10,000 Data source: FME OUTPUT : Natural resources protected and
managed to enhance sustainable productivity and livelihoods Indicator : Forest
areas as  proportion of total land area protected Baseline: 86m Hectares Target:
86m Hectares Federal Ministry of Environment, Department of Forestry Annually
Forestry Research Institute of Nigeria Regular: $78,000 Other: $,673,800 • FME •
NCCCN • United Nations agencies • Media houses Indicator : Number of safe
practices introduced to reduce use/emissions of Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)
in the foam and refrigeration sectors Baseline:  Targets: Reclaim centres – ,
Refurbished training centres – 35, Women technicians – ,440 Data source: FME
Indicator : Number of Nigeria commitment to global treaties realized Baseline:
Target:  Data source: FME OUTPUT : Energy gap closed Regular: $375,000 Other:
$16,000,000 • MoE • FME • NCCCN Indicator : Number of people who benefitted from
clean, affordable, and sustainable energy Baseline: Male=189; Female=111 Target:
Males=35,504; Female=34,559 Data source: FME Outcome total $58,360,800 NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: NDP 2021–2025, defence, peace and security, governance
institutions and national orientation (SDGs , , , , , 10, 16 and 17) UNSDCF
Strategic Priority  (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: More inclusive,
participatory, transparent and gender-sensitive governance, justice and human
rights systems are in place at all levels to promote acceleration in achieving
the 2030 Agenda and SDGs for  peaceful, inclusive, and cohesive society RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN (2022–2025) OUTCOME : Leaving no one behind,  rights-based
approach centred on human agency and human development Indicator : Rule of law
index Baseline: Target: Data source: Annual Report of Mo Ibrahim Index on
African Governance Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Ibrahim Index of African
Governance (IIAG) OUTPUT : Rule of law and access to justice and respect for
human rights advanced through improved capacity of institutions and right
holders Regular: $468,000 Other: $64,078,000 • MBNP • • National Assembly of
INEC the Federal Republic of Nigeria (NASS) • National Institute for Legislative
and Democratic Studies (NILDS) Indicator : Number of SGBV victims supported, who
have access to justice Baseline: 18 (2021) Target: 200 (2027)  13 DP/DCP/NGA/
Data source: Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) Election Report
Frequency: Annually Responsible: INEC Data source: Federal Ministry of Women
Affairs (FMWA) report; Spotlight Initiative report • • CSOs • • • Norway •
Germany • Canada • United Kingdom • South Korea • Inter-Party Advisory Council
FMWA European Union Japan Indicator : Percentage of SGBV cases reported to the
National GBV Data Situation Room (NGDSR) and resolved with survivors compensated
Baseline: % (2021) Target: 50% (2027) Data source: FMWA report; Spotlight
Initiative report Indicator : Proportion of seats held by women at national and
local parliaments Baseline: 38% (national parliament – 2019) Target: 20% (2027)
Data source: World Bank;  Frequency: Annually Responsible: World Bank Regular:
$468,000 Other: $23,000,000 • UNV • NASS • Ministry of Justice • National
Judicial Indicator : Percentage of police officers expressing positive
perceptions and attitudes towards police reform Baseline: % (2021) Target: 90%
(2027) Data source: Annual Report of the Nigeria Police Force; Centre for Law
Enforcement Education in Nigeria (CLEEN) Foundation perception surveys Council
(NJC) • Ministry of Police Affairs Regular: $468,000 Other: $,530,000 OUTPUT :
Increased participation and representation of women, youth, and other
marginalized groups in governance processes Indicator : Percentage of women
elected to leadership positions at the federal level Baseline: 17% (2019)
Target: 20% (2027) Data source: INEC election report Indicator : Number of new
registered voters Baseline:84,004,084 registered voters (2018) Target: ,000,000
(total: 92,000,004) Female: ,100,000; Male: ,900,Data source: INEC election
report Indicator : Overall governance index by IIAG Baseline: 45, (2019) Target:
OUTPUT : Strengthened systems, institutions, and capacities, including civil
society, for enhancing good governance 14  DP/DCP/NGA/ Indicator : Number of
CSOs assisted with improved capacities to provide oversight on government
procurement laws and processes Baseline:  Target:  Source: Government
procurement and UNDP reports Indicator : Number of states with improved
capacities and systems on procurement and due processes Baseline:  Target:
Source: Government procurement and UNDP reports OUTPUT : Strengthened systems,
institutions, and capacities for transitioning to development solutions, and for
inclusive and gender responsive peace building Indicator : Global Peace Index
Baseline: 147 out of 160 (2020) Target: 100 (2027) Data source: Global Peace
Index Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Global Peace Network Regular: $468,000
Other: $60,000,000 • State governments • Ministry of Information (MoI) • NASS •
IPCR • Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps (NSCDC) Indicator : Number of
functional infrastructures for peace at national and sub- national levels
Baseline:  (2021): National – ; Sub-national –  Target: 17 (2027): National – ;
Sub-national – 16 Data source: Acts of Parliament • Ministry of Niger Delta
Affairs (MNDA) • Nigeria Police Force (NPF) • Australia, Canada, Germany,
Norway, Japan, South Korea, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States European Union
Ford Foundation Indicator : Number of gender-responsive and conflict sensitive
development policies, systems and plans in place to prevent risk of conflict
including climate security Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2027) Data source:
NCSALWs and NSA reports • • • CSOs • • Nigeria Germany, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
United Kingdom, United States Ford Foundation State governments OUTPUT :
Communities affected by violent conflict enabled to regain lost livelihoods,
infrastructures and basic services for durable socioeconomic development and
restoration of local economy Regular: $468,000 Other: $69,816,770 European Union
• • • MoI • Ministry of Defence  15 DP/DCP/NGA/ Indicator : Number of people
benefiting from improved infrastructure for recovery in crisis or post-crisis
settings disaggregated by sex Baseline: 770 (2021) Target: ,770 (2027) Data
source: UNDP donor reports • North-East Development Commission (NEDC) • IPCR •
NSCDC • CSOs • ECOWAS Indicator : Percentage of households benefiting from jobs
and improved livelihoods disaggregated by sex Baseline: 42% (2021) Target: 60%
(2027) Data source: UNDP survey Outcome total Grand total $226,764,770
$300,795,570 16