Table of Contents:  Programme rationale : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/COG/  Programme rationale  The Republic of the Congo has an estimated
population of  million (2018), of whom 51 per cent are women and per cent are
under age 20, as indicated in the National Development Plan (Plan National de
Développement (PND)) 2018–The population growth rate of this sparsely populated
country is  per cent The country has significant natural resources that offer
strong development potential, but the oil crisis of 2014 undermined economic and
social development efforts and left the country in an unprecedented crisis
Although Congo is classified as  middle-income country, the 2014 crisis revealed
the fragility of its economy Gross domestic product (GDP) contracted by  per
cent in 2016 and  per cent in The weak economic recovery in 2018 is mainly
driven by an increase in oil production and the price of oil The economy showed
slight improvement in 2018, which should be confirmed in 2019, with estimated
growth rates of  per cent and  per cent of GDP respectively for these years
However, this recovery remains precarious The non-oil share of GDP, already
marginal prior to the 2014 crisis, showed   per cent3 decline in The weak
prospects for economic growth will certainly affect the Government’ co-funding
of development activities  Official development assistance has represented some
per cent of total programmable aid since 2017, of which the social sector
received 48 per cent and the economic sector 21 per cent, mainly for
infrastructure and services  The Human Development Index value remained stable,
at 61, and the Congo ranked 137 of 189 countries6 in The poverty level,
estimated at per cent according to the 2014 national Human Development Report,
remains high Poverty is more pronounced in rural (54 per cent) than urban (per
cent) areas and among people with disabilities and indigenous peoples, who also
have limited access to education, literacy and basic social services  The Congo
ranked 143 on the Gender Inequality Index in 2017, showing large disparities in
gender equality Progress was made in recent years with respect to women’
representation in decision-making spheres, particularly in the Senate and the
National Assembly These modest advances, however, should not conceal the
sociocultural barriers faced by women and the significant challenge of gender-
based violence According to  2016 report, persistent customs and traditions
prevent women from realizing their potential  In 2018, the Congo ranked 41 of 54
African countries in the Ibrahim Index of African Governance Numerous governance
challenges result in low levels of satisfaction on the part of the population
and service users These challenges include: the inefficiency of the central and
decentralized administrations; the insufficient technical and financial
capacities of human resources; the low quality of services;  judicial and
security system that poorly protects human rights; and unequal access to justice
Given the weaknesses in transparency and accountability in the management of
public affairs and of citizen participation in local decision-making, the system
of economic governance is inefficient and decentralization is only slightly
effective The Congo was ranked 165 of 180 countries on the 2018 Transparency
International Corruption Perception Index, with  score of 19/According to an
International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission report of November 2018, the county’
debt accounted for 96 per cent of GDP as of that date  IMF, op cit  World Bank
Group, Situation économique de la République du Congo, September According to
data from the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development  Ibid  Human Development Report Congo also ranked
13 of 53 African countries  Slight increases were observed in the Senate (from
10 per cent in 2012 to 21 per cent in 2017), National Assembly (from  per cent
in 2012 to 11 per cent in 2017) and in local department councils (from 12 per
cent in 2014 to 22 per cent in 2017)  Report prepared in 2016 by the ministry in
charge of the promotion of women with support from UNDP 19-04948X () 100419
*1904948* DP/DCP/COG/  Despite the signing of  ceasefire and cessation-of-
hostilities agreement in December 2016 between the Government and Pastor Ntumi,
one of the main opposition figures, and an amelioration of the situation, the
security situation in the Pool region still requires special attention At the
beginning of 2018, 158,717 displaced persons were registered and affected by
insecurity, 114,086 of whom were in the Pool and Bouenza departments Moreover,
despite the collection of weapons in the Pool, the reintegration of ex-
combatants is not yet effective The negative impact of the deterioration of
social and economic conditions, in addition to the high levels of poverty in
this region (per cent compared to per cent in urban areas), can put youth at
risk of being co-opted for political reasons Reconciliation between communities
and ex-combatants, and between ex-combatants and the police force, needs to be
strengthened Additional risks include the subregional challenges in northern
Cameroon and the Central African Republic  The country has ratified
international and subregional agreements for management of Congo Bassin Despite
its proactive policy of carrying out major initiatives in the green and blue
economy, its 65 per cent forest cover, many rivers and extensive national parks
(covering 12 per cent of the country), the Congo faces numerous challenges
related to climate change: sustained degradation of its natural resources and
environment due to anthropogenic pressures from overexploitation of forest
products; the reduction of fallow land; excessive and illegal extractive mining;
uncontrolled irrigation; illegal clearing for agricultural purposes; and
repeated bush fires Promoting diversification of the economy should be based on
sustainable agriculture and ecotourism, to promote sustainable value chains and
production methods that preserve ecosystems This would mitigate pressure on
natural resources, avoid excessive deforestation, limit air, soil and water
pollution and enhance the resilience of the population to climate change  With
very young population, the Congo needs to focus on human capital development, as
the youth unemployment rate (ages 15–29) is estimated at per cent10 (2016) The
importance of the informal sector, particularly in agriculture where most young
people work, and the inability of the education system to meet the needs of the
labour market reinforce the need for greater investment in training
opportunities and development of adequate skills, especially in high-potential
sectors such as sustainable agriculture and ecotourism Given its relevance for
sustainable management of resources and for employment, agriculture is  key
sector for sustainable development The 2017 independent country programme
evaluation highlighted important achievements which need to be consolidated
Policy frameworks have been developed including policy papers on the development
of internal trade and the national land policy, the national tourism strategy
and the national employment policy For the new programme cycle, UNDP will
support government authorities in operationalizing the policies to contribute to
economic diversification The evaluation recognized that UNDP has enabled the
Congo to elaborate several strategic documents related to biodiversity and
tourism and reinforced the coordination mechanism at country level for
sustainable development management The evaluation highlighted that for the new
UNDP programme, direct support to implementation at community level will be  key
comparative advantage, including supporting authorities in systematically
monitoring achievements to sustain programmatic outcomes This will require
focus on systematic monitoring, better coordination and effective ownership by
national counterparts II Programme priorities and partnerships The country
programme is designed to support the Republic of the Congo to build on progress
achieved and address remaining gaps in governance, peacebuilding, security,
economic diversification and poverty reduction, and strengthen resilience with
the aim of reducing inequalities and breaking the cycle of poverty UNDP will
build on its comparative advantages in the areas of governance, women’
empowerment and gender  According to figures from lists provided by the
directors of the social affairs departments, which is responsible for the
registration of displaced persons and which served as the basis for the
preparation of the 2018 Humanitarian Response Plan, the situation evolved
positively 10 Ministère de ’Enseignement Technique et Professionnel, de la
Formation Qualifiante et de ’Emploi, 2016 report  DP/DCP/COG/ equality,
environmental sustainability and resilience to enhance its contribution to
Congo’ achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development The programme
is based on the assertion that long-term investments in sustainable agriculture
and ecotourism, together with skills development and strengthening of
accountable, transparent and inclusive governance, protection of human rights,
reduced gender inequalities and an inclusive State-citizen dialogue, will
improve trust in government actions, build peace and strengthen security If
governance is inclusive and accountable, government actions will promote
effective economic diversification in  sustainable way The UNDP contribution to
inclusive governance will support this transformation with the aim of leaving no
one behind The programme adopts an integrated approach to problem analysis
combined with better targeting (taking into consideration key factors such as
vulnerability and potential) of actors and sectors (agriculture and ecotourism
for example) where interventions will be concentrated in both urban and rural
areas This should help to strengthen the coherence of actions and promote the
scaling-up of successful pilot initiatives UNDP will consolidate gains in
capacity-building of networks of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to
amplify advocacy for improving the legal framework for civil society
intervention UNDP will strengthen its collaboration with academia and scientific
researchers, which is essential for supporting the development of the
agricultural, tourism and environmental sectors, particularly for promoting
renewable sources of energy The programme, developed in consultation with the
Government and national partners, civil society organizations (CSOs), the
private sector and development partners including the United Nations system,
represents the UNDP contribution to the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) 2020–It is in line with the PND , the United Nations
Humanitarian Response Plan, the African Union Agenda 2063, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018– It builds on the UNDP
comparative advantages in policy and technical support and lessons learned from
the previous programme In its integrator role, UNDP will encourage the promotion
of cross-cutting and inclusive approaches based on social cohesion and
peacebuilding dynamics The programme has two interrelated pillars that
simultaneously address challenges related to governance and peacebuilding
(pillar ) and sustainable economic diversification and the resilience of
institutions and communities vulnerable to climate change and crises (pillar )
Emphasis will be placed on the most vulnerable communities and populations to
leave no one behind and reduce gender inequalities and economic disparities to
break the cycle of generational and multidimensional poverty through more
equally shared growth In addition to convening stakeholders to support the
country’ achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, UNDP will strengthen
and leverage partnerships for Goal-related financing, including with the private
sector and technical and financial partners UNDP will build on the current
portfolio of Global Environment Facility (GEF) projects and the opportunities
around strategic forest management and other areas with international financial
institutions and bilateral partners to explore jointly with the Government
opportunities for advancing sustainable development UNDP will respond to
government priorities through signature solutions - and contribute to the
achievement of the targets identified in the UNDAF related to Sustainable
Development Goals , , , , 13, 16 and As the Goals have been contextualized and
integrated in the country’ strategic documents, particularly the PND, with the
support of UNDP, the programme will focus on operationalizing them through
national and local discussion platforms around the 2030 Agenda The aim is to
localize the Goals through local development plans UNDP will strengthen its
partnerships with relevant local partners in line with its partnership and
resource mobilization strategy It will focus on strengthening the capacities of
community- based organizations to provide inclusive services to the most
vulnerable men and women and on the normative and policy-related aspects and
concrete needs of the population and beneficiary institutions to cope with an
evolving context at both the local and national levels It will consolidate and
extend its partnership with the private sector (chambers of commerce and
individual businesses) and academia to propose innovative solutions to the
development challenges facing the Congo UNDP is well positioned to deliver
DP/DCP/COG/ programmatic support for national development priorities and
institutional-level capacity development, and to mobilize technical expertise
and financial resources using the national implementation modality In both
pillars, UNDP will enhance South-South and triangular cooperation and
collaborate with national centres of excellence, with an emphasis on innovative
approaches that can be adapted to the national context, such as Rwanda’
YouthConnekt and Green Fund initiatives UNDP is supporting  partnership between
Morocco and the Congo to set up  Blue Fund for natural resource management and
aims to expand this partnership to include the Islamic Development Bank to
support projects on skills development and livelihoods for women and youth UNDP
will promote knowledge-sharing on issues such as financing for development and
the blue and green economy, building on the results of  development finance
assessment to be conducted with the support of the Regional Bureau for Africa
Strengthening governance, peacebuilding and security In partnership with the
Ministry of Planning and Finance and the UNDP Pôle de Dakar, the programme will
support the development and use of tools for monitoring transparency and
managing public finances, including the planning, programming, budgeting,
monitoring and evaluation chain This includes improved capacities for collection
of data related to the Goals as well as monitoring and improving the
coordination of development aid policies and programmes by the Office of the
Prime Minister, the National Assembly, the Senate and the High Authority Against
Corruption This support will help to strengthen  culture of accountability and
transparency and the technical, human and organizational capacities of anti-
corruption institutions to strengthen the integrity and transparency of the
national system These initiatives will be undertaken in collaboration with the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Similarly, support will be
provided to strengthen the national statistics system to better monitor the PND
UNDP will work with the Ministry of Interior and Decentralization to develop
methodological tools for local development planning by local and regional
authorities based on the Sustainable Development Goals This will strengthen
citizens’ participation in decision-making on the development and implementation
of local development plans It will further contribute to the implementation of
the decentralization policy, which is  government priority, in particular
through operationalization of the strategic plan for reforming the State
developed by the Ministry of Civil Service, and to social protection These tools
will systematically address issues of gender equity and equality In partnership
with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the Ministry for the
Promotion of Women and the Integration of Women in Development, UNDP will
continue to collaborate on the operationalization of the national gender policy,
specifically through advocacy to improve the legal and institutional framework
for reducing gender inequalities, and the identification of appropriate funding
mechanisms for women' entrepreneurship To accelerate results on poverty
reduction and women’ employment, UNDP will develop and strengthen strategic
partnerships with the private sector which have already shown encouraging
results, for example in the forest management and oil sectors In partnership
with the United Nations Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
(UNCHRD), UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights
and the Ministry of Social Affairs to establish  platform for collaboration for
implementation of the recommendations of the universal periodic review (UPR),
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and other human
rights treaty bodies, including human trafficking This platform will bring
together the Government, civil society and national human rights institutions to
improve the effectiveness of implementation In partnership with the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the Ministry of Health and the National AIDS
Council, UNDP will support strengthening of the legal and policy environment for
equitable access to health, particularly by marginalized and vulnerable groups
DP/DCP/COG/ UNDP will provide advisory support to the Ministry of Interior and
Decentralization, the Office of the High Commissioner for the Reintegration of
Ex-Combatants (Haut Commissariat  la Réinsertion des Ex Combattants (HCREC)) and
the National Council for Dialogue and Civil Society to strengthen social
cohesion, by supporting platforms for intercommunity dialogue in the Pool
Department Participation of women and women-led organizations will be key In
partnership with the Ministry of Interior and Decentralization and the Ministry
of Defence, UNDP will work towards strengthening the technical and operational
capacities of the police and gendarmerie UNDP will continue to support
government efforts for peacebuilding, reconciliation and social cohesion,
specifically the implementation of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme signed by the HCREC for reintegration of former
combatants and associated populations, among them internally displaced persons
including women In that context UNDP will also support the application of an
action plan for implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security Diversification of economy in  sustainable manner and
promotion of resilience of communities and institutions vulnerable to climate
change In partnership with the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, the
programme will emphasize developing cocoa and banana value chains, beekeeping11
and promotion of ecotourism by developing national protected areas and
ecosystems UNDP will help diversify economic activities for youth, women and
indigenous people in targeted areas and support developing their skills to
access these opportunities and thus reduce inequalities To this end, UNDP, in
partnership with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Tourism and Environment,
will contribute to strengthening the policy, institutional and regulatory
framework for the agricultural and ecotourism sectors UNDP will assist the
Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Forest Economy, the Ministry of Tourism
and Environment and small- and medium-sized enterprises to identify and promote
niches with high potential for decent jobs and sustainable incomes, as well as
to develop value chains in the respective sectors Emphasis will be placed on
building human capital and skills that match employment requirements and
activities promoted by young people and women in partnership with the private
sector for innovative and sustainable financing UNDP will strengthen
collaboration with the Ministry of Forest Economy and the Ministry of Tourism
and Environment for developing and implementing plans for managing and
developing parks and protected areas such as Lac Télé Community Reserve, Odzala
Kokoua National Park and the Lossi Gorilla Sanctuary as tourist sites This will
be done in line with the ongoing transboundary initiatives with Cameroon,
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Gabon The programme will emphasize
strengthening the national system of protected areas, jointly managed with local
communities to ensure the sustainability of production methods through capacity-
building for local communities This will be achieved by helping the Government
to develop  sustainable financing mechanism following the model of the funds for
the management of protected areas and the Congo Basin, , the Blue Fund, the
Green Climate Fund, particularly for the benefit of young people, women and the
poorest populations to strengthen the resilience of communities most vulnerable
to climate change UNDP will work to support improving knowledge and
dissemination of adaptation techniques and technologies in the climate change,
water and agriculture sectors UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of
Environment in updating the National Climate Change Adaptation Plan as
strategic programming framework for climate change Planned interventions will be
implemented under the leadership of the Government (Ministry of Planning and
other key ministries) The proposed programme is building on  framework of
multiple partnerships with public-private sector entities, CSOs and academia
This will entail strengthening joint initiatives with United Nations agencies in
the framework of Delivering as One and the UNDP integrator role It will be
implemented through innovative, multidimensional approaches of both upstream and
downstream 11 Eighty per cent of food and agricultural products are imported
DP/DCP/COG/ initiatives with the support of government cost sharing in the
context of  lower middle- income country III Programme and risk management This
country programme document outlines the contributions of UNDP to national
results and serves as the accountability tool of the country office to the
Executive Board Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarters levels are prescribed in the organization' programme and operations
policies and procedures, and in the internal controls framework In accordance
with Executive Board decision 2013/, all direct costs related to the
implementation of the programme will be charged to the projects concerned
National implementation will be the preferred approach to programme
implementation, and the appropriate operational modalities will be defined
according to the interventions to strengthen ownership and accountability If
necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution to enable
response to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will
be used in  coordination with other United Nations agencies to manage financial
risks  macro-assessment of the public finance management system and the micro-
assessments of relevant partners will be carried out in 2019 to identify
potential risks related to the management of public resources UNDP will build
the capacities of implementing partners on results-based management and on UNDP
project and programme management rules and procedures In collaboration with
other United Nations agencies, UNDP will implement the joint programming
framework and business operations strategy under Delivering as One UNDP will
review its capacities and find appropriate measures to ensure its financial
sustainability including improving the implementation of the direct project
costs, the allocation of staff according to programmatic needs and the
deployment of project units in the field for efficient implementation For the
effective use of resources, financial management controls will be implemented in
line with the internal control and improved cost-recovery mechanisms To ensure
national ownership, national partners will be fully engaged in planning and
management processes The main potential risks to programme implementation
include: () deterioration of the security context and sociopolitical instability
resulting from  worsening of the socioeconomic, political and governance
environments in the country and the subregion This is linked to  possible
aggravation of the humanitarian crises in Likouala and the Pool region, to
possible political tensions around the presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled for  and to instability in the subregion; ()  decline in the country'
oil resources, which may lead to reduced public funding and affect opportunities
for government financing This will require the country office to adopt  bold
approach to resource mobilization in Congo’ middle-income country context; and
() limited capacity of government institutions and national partners in
programmatic implementation and application of HACT rules and procedures UNDP
will mitigate these risks through regular monitoring and scenario-based
analysis, making required adjustments in case the situation deteriorates To
diversify its resources and increase its capacities for programme delivery, the
country office will develop and implement its partnership and communication
strategy and action plan, with support from the Bureau of External Relations and
Advocacy and the active engagement of partners This will allow the country
office to diversify and widen its funding base by developing partnerships with
international financial institutions (, World Bank, IMF) and other sources of
global funds (Green Climate Fund, GEF, Peacebuilding Fund) and with traditional
and non-traditional partners (foundations, the private sector) IV Programme
monitoring and evaluation Monitoring and evaluation will be aligned with the
results framework of the UNDAF and the UNDP Strategic Plan,  and backed by the
PND results monitoring framework At least  per cent of the office' programmatic
resources will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation activities UNDP will
allocate additional resources to strengthen national capacities for: () data
collection and better monitoring of progress made towards achieving the national
development goals; and () regular monitoring of Sustainable Development Goal
targets Programme monitoring and evaluation will be  DP/DCP/COG/ carried out
using  results-based management and quality assurance approach Monitoring will
be carried out annually and will be integrated into the UNDAF monitoring system
Regular monitoring of country programme outputs will be carried out based on
credible data There will be  final evaluation of relevant projects funded by the
GEF The contributions to national results will be regularly reviewed to guide
decision-making and adjust the programme as needed UNDP will work with national
partners responsible for monitoring results of development activities and the
United Nations country team monitoring and evaluation group The collection and
analysis of indicator data will be disaggregated by sex, age, etc, to inform the
core principle of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind The gender marker will
be integrated into all projects and will serve as  resource allocation tool UNDP
will actively participate in joint annual reviews of the UNDAF in collaboration
with other stakeholders  midterm evaluation will assess the effectiveness of the
country programme, including lessons learned, to inform the development of the
next cycle  DP/DCP/COG/ Annex Results and resources framework for the Congo
(2020–2024) NATIONAL PRIORITY/GOAL: PND strategic axis: strengthening of
governance Sustainable Development Goals: , 16 and 17 UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP: By 2024, the Congolese populations will benefit from an improved system of
institutional, democratic, human rights, administrative and economic governance
that promotes inclusive and participatory development based on peacebuilding and
humanitarian efforts RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Strengthen resilience to
shocks and crises Major partners / partnerships frameworks Indicative resources
by outcome ($) UNDAF outcome indicator(), baselines, target() Data source,
frequency and responsibilities Indicative country programme outputs Indicator :
Primary government expenditures as  proportion of original approved budget, by
sector (education, health, tourism, etc) (Goal ) Baseline: 41% Target: 50% Data
source: Reports from different sectoral ministries and the Statistical
Commission of Parliament Frequency: Annual Ministries of Justice and Human
Rights, of the Interior, of Finance, of Planning and Development, of Women and
the Integration of Women in Development, of Public Services and State Reform
Parliament CSOs Media NGOs Auditors Board National Police Gendarmerie Nationale
HCREC UNHCR, UNFPA UNHCDH-United Nations Office for Central Africa UNESCO PBSO
Regular:800,000 Other: 14,500,000 Output : Departments involved in research and
planning (33) and their directors have enhanced technical capacities to
formulate, implement, monitor, evaluate and coordinate inclusive development
laws, policies and programmes aligned to human rights commitments Indicator :
Number of () departments and () departmental directors who adopt and implement
systematic tools and practices to monitor and evaluate sectoral policies
Baseline:  Target: () 33 () 10 Data source: Monitoring and evaluation framework
paper of sectoral departments Frequency: Midterm UNDP, UNICEF, UNESCO, FAO,
UNFPA, UNHCR, WFP, OHCHR Indicator : Percentage of recommendations made by
international bodies for the protection of human rights and accepted by the
Government that are implemented Baseline: % (37 recommendations from the sixth
report (2012) of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW)) Target: 54% Data source: Periodic reports of UNHCRD Report of
human rights NGOs National report on the Goals PND evaluation report Report of
the Statistical Committee of Parliament Reports of CEDAW and other treaty bodies
Indicator : Proportion of newly formulated development policies that are gender-
sensitive Baseline:  Target: 30% Data source: General Directorate of Planning
Frequency: Biennial Data source: Perception survey Frequency: Biannual Indicator
: Existence of  validated assessments/reviews of the PND implementation
conducted by the DEP Baseline: No Target: Yes Data source: Monitoring and
implementation reports of the PND Frequency: Biennial Indicator : Mo Ibrahim
Index of African Governance Baseline: (2018) Target: Congolese Human Rights
Observatory Association pour les Droits de 'Homme et 'Univers Carcéral Data
source: Mo Ibrahim Annual Report Frequency: Annual Indicator : Gini Index
DP/DCP/COG/ Multi-partner support programme for local elections in Congo High
Council on Freedom of Communication National Commission to Fight Corruption and
Fraud Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative National Financial
Investigation Agency World Bank Bilateral agencies (United States Agency for
International Development) Baseline: 465 Target: 40 Output : Parliamentary
processes and the national courts responsible for audit and budgetary discipline
strengthened to promote inclusion, transparency and accountability UNDP, UNICEF,
UNESCO, FAO, UNFPA, UNHCR, WFP, OHCHR Indicator : Parliament has improved
capacities to undertake inclusive, effective and accountable law-making,
oversight and representation (Strategic Plan indicator ) Baseline: No Target:
Yes Data source: Official Journal-Parliament report-Training reports Frequency:
Biennial Data source: Gini Index Frequency: Biannual UNDP, UNICEF, UNESCO, FAO,
UNFPA, UNHCR, WFP, OHCHR Output : CSOs have the technical capacity to
effectively exercise their participatory and accountability role in defining and
monitoring public policies and promoting transparency in governance action
Indicator : Number of () NGOs and () organizations of media professionals
utilizing the public space to assume the roles set out in the law on
transparency and accountability in public financial management Baseline:
Target: () 50 NGOs, () 20 Data source: Reports of institutions and civil
society; Media press releases Frequency: Annual Output : Ministry of Justice and
Human Rights, Ministry of Social Affairs, civil society and national human
rights institutions have improved capacities for the effective use and implement
the recommendations of the UPR, CEDAW and other human rights treaty bodies
Indicator : Number of recommendations from the UPR, CEDAW including
recommendations on gender equality, human trafficking and protection of rights
of vulnerable groups Baseline: 10 Target: 60 Data source: Reports of treaty
bodies and human rights institutions and NGOs (UPR, CEDAW, Human Rights Watch,
National Human Rights Council, Congolese Observatory of Human Rights, United
States Department of State) Frequency: Annual Output : National capacities
strengthened for reintegration, reconciliation, peaceful management of conflict
and prevention of violent extremism in response to national policies and
priorities 10 DP/DCP/COG/ Indicator : Percentage of platforms/community dialogue
committees set up at the local and national levels with at least 50% women
representativeness Baseline:  Target: 16 Data source: Reports of HCREC /Land
Administration Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of dialogue mechanisms
provided during electoral cycle Baseline:  Target:15 Data source: Report of the
National Electoral Commission and Observers Frequency by end of cycle Indicator
: Number of ex-combatants (men and women) reintegrated into communities
Baseline:  Target: 10,000 (: ,500; : ,500) Data source: Reports of HCREC,
Ministries of Social Affairs and of Humanitarian Action Frequency: Annual Output
: The national statistics system has strengthened technical capacities for the
systematic production of reliable, disaggregated, quality data to efficiently
monitor the implementation of the PND and progress on the Sustainable
Development Goals Indicator : Number of data-collection/analysis mechanisms
providing disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the Goals: ()
Conventional data-collection methods (, surveys) () Administrative reporting
systems () New data sources (, big data) Baseline: () ; ()  voluntary national
review on the Goals; ()  Target: () ; () ; ()  crisis risk dashboard Data
source: National monitoring reports on the achievement of the Goals, national
Human Development Report Frequency: Annual 11 DP/DCP/COG/ Indicator : Percentage
of local authorities with  land-use plan including  general cadastral plan and
disaster risk management plan Baseline:  Target: 30% Data source: Ministry of
Land Affairs and Public Domain Frequency: End of cycle Indicator : Percentage of
local authorities that efficiently use newly local development planning and
designed methodological implementation mechanisms Baseline:  Target: 25% Data
source: Reports of the General Directorate of Local Authorities Frequency:
Annual tools of NATIONAL PRIORITY/GOAL: PND Strategic Axis: Economic
Diversification Sustainable Development Goals: , , , 13 and 17 UNDAF OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP: By 2024, the poorest Congolese populations have access to
renewable energies and diversified economic opportunities that create jobs and
sustainable incomes in the fields of agriculture, food security and ecotourism
while respecting environmental standards and contributing to increasing
resilience to climate change RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Accelerate
structural change that is conducive to sustainable development Indicator : Youth
unemployment rate, disaggregated by sex and geographical area Baseline % (: %, :
%, urban: 39% rural: %) Target: 28% Output : Vulnerable populations, especially
women and youth in targeted areas, have access to viable, diversified and
environmentally friendly economic opportunities in sustainable agriculture and
ecotourism Regular: 751,000 Other: 15,025,000 Ministries of Tourism and the
Environment and of Forest Economy Central African Forest Commission,
International Commission of Congo Basin Oubangui Sangha Conference on Wet
Ecosystems of Dense Humid Forests of Central Africa Blue Fund for the Congo
Basin; GEF FAO Green Climate Fund World Wildlife Fund Wildlife Conservation
Society UNFCC Data source: Reports of ILO and of Ministries of Labour and of
Youth General population and habitat census General agricultural census Third
household living conditions survey Report of national employment agency
Indicator : Number of: () new jobs created; and () people with improved
livelihoods, disaggregated by sex, in newly developed value chains, sustainable
agriculture and ecotourism Baseline: () ; ()  Target: () ,000 (,000 women, ,000
men); () ,000 (,000 men, ,000 women) Data source: Reports on wildlife
conservation services, statistics on ecotourism by the Ministry of Tourism
Frequency: annual Frequency of data collection: Biennial Indicator : Proportion
of the population living below the poverty line (disaggregated by sex) Baseline:
% (: 54%, : 46%) Target: 38% (: 50%, : 50%) FAO, UNESCO, UNDP, WFP, UNHCR
Indicator : Number of developed and operational ecotourism sites Baseline:
Target:  Data source: Reports of the Conservation of Protected areas services,
Department of Statistics by the Ministry of Forest Economy Data source Reports
of ILO and partners, 12 DP/DCP/COG/ World Bank and of the Ministries of Labour
and of Youth General population and habitat census General agricultural census
Third household living conditions survey Frequency: Annual International Union
for Conservation of Nature Congolese Agency for Fauna and Protected Areas United
States Agency for International Development European Union World Tourism
Organization UNEP UNIDO GEF, Islamic Development Bank Indicator : Number of
ecotourism fauna and flora cultural products developed and available in the
market Baseline:  Target:  Data source: Reports of the Congo Agency for Fauna
and Protected Areas, report of the Directorate General for Tourism Frequency:
annual Indicator : Proportion protected area at national level managed
sustainably by populations Baseline: 12% Target: 15% Frequency of data
collection: Biennial FAO, UNESCO, UNDP, WFP, UNHCR Indicator : Number of youths,
women and indigenous people who found  job following skills development
supported by UNDP Baseline:  Target: ,000 youth, 500 women, 250 indigenous
persons Data source: Reports of Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Women and NGOs
Frequency: annual Data source Ministry of Planning report National Human
Development report Output  National institutions and populations adopt
sustainable biodiversity management frameworks, practices and measures to
counter the effects of climate change Frequency of data collection: Biennial
FAO, UNESCO, UNDP, WFP, UNHCR Indicator : Number of parks and reserves
sustainably managed with the participation of the populations Baseline:  Target:
Data source: Report of the Agence congolaise de la Faune et des aires protégés
(Congolese Agency for Fauna and Protected Areas) Frequency: annual Indicator
Number of agricultural farmers (disaggregated by sex) of the target areas that
adopt climate change adaptation practices and techniques Baseline: 74 (35 women,
39 men) Target: ,000 (400 women, 600 men) Data source: Odzala Kokoua Park
report, project report Frequency: Biannual Indicator : Number of artisanal
miners that adopt sustainable mining practices Baseline:  Target: 300 (270 men,
30 women) Source: Report of the Ministry of Mines Frequency: Biannual 13
DP/DCP/COG/ Output : The department in charge of energy has strengthened
capacities to put in place legal and regulatory measures that promote and
facilitate access to renewable energy for the populations in targeted areas
Indicator : () Number and proportion and households benefiting from clean,
affordable and sustainable energy access (micro-hydro); () Women- headed
households; () rural households with access Baseline: 250 Target: () ,500; ()
600%; () 150% Data source: Report of the National Rural Electrification Agency
Frequency: End of programme 14