 Country Energy Security Indicator Profile 2009 Fiji Country Energy Security
Indicator Profile 2009 Prepared by the Energy Programme, Economic Development
Division Secretariat of the Pacific Community Suva, Fiji 2012 © Copyright
Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), 2012 All rights for commercial / for
profit reproduction or translation, in any form, reserved SPC authorises the
partial reproduction or translation of this material for scientific, educational
or research purposes, provided that SPC and the source document are properly
acknowledged Permission to reproduce the document and/or translate in whole, in
any form, whether for commercial / for profit or non-profit purposes, must be
requested in writing Original SPC artwork may not be altered or separately
published without permission Original text: English Secretariat of the Pacific
Community Cataloguing-in-publication data Fiji Country Energy Security Indicator
Profile 2009 / prepared by the Energy Programme, Economic Development Division,
Secretariat of the Pacific Community  Energy policy – Fiji  Power resources –
Fiji  Energy security – Fiji  Title II Secretariat of the Pacific Community
79099611 AACR2 ISBN: -- Table of contents Acknowledgement   Foreword  vi
Abbreviations  vii Country profile  Energy context  FAESP key energy security
outcome  – access to energy  FAESP key energy security outcome  – affordability
FAESP key energy security outcome  – efficiency and productivity  FAESP key
energy security outcome  – environmental quality  FAESP action theme  –
Leadership, governance, coordination and partnership  10 FAESP action theme  –
Capacity development, planning, policy and regulatory frameworks 11 FAESP action
theme  – Energy production and supply  12  Petroleum and alternative fuels  12
Renewable energy  13 FAESP action theme  – Energy conversion  14  Electric power
14 FAESP action theme  – End-use energy consumption  15  Transport energy use
15  Energy efficiency and conservation  15 FAESP action theme  – Energy data and
information  16 FAESP action theme  – Financing, monitoring and evaluation  17
iv Fiji  ount ry Ener gy Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi   2009 Acknowledgement The
Framework for Action on Energy Security in the Pacific (FAESP) country energy
security indicator report 2009 was prepared by the Energy Programme of the
Economic Development Division (EDD) of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community
(SPC) Many special thanks to the Fiji Department of Energy (FDOE) for their
contribution in the coordination of the National Planning and Policy Workshop in
October SPC would also like to thank the European Union Energy Initiative –
Partnership Dialogue Facility (EUEI PDF) for providing funds to SPC to carry out
in-country technical activities and collect data required for the energy
security indicators The cooperation of the many contributors to this edition is
gratefully acknowledged The source note below each table credits the various
government and private sector agencies that have collaborated in furnishing the
information for the booklet  Fiji  ountry Energy Secu rity In dic  tor Pro file
20 09 Foreword In August 2010 at the 41st Pacific Islands Forum at Port the
Leaders Vila, Vanuatu, for endorsed the Framework Action on Energy Security in
the Pacific (FAESP): 2010–2020 as the regional blueprint for the provision of
technical assistance to the energy sectors of Pacific Island countries and
territories (PICTs) FAESP encompasses the Leaders’ vision for an energy secure
Pacific where Pacific people at all times have access to sufficient sustainable
sources of clean and affordable energy and services to enhance their social and
economic well-being In order to better appreciate the impacts of FAESP and its
implementation plan on the energy security status of PICTs, baseline energy
security indicators must be established, against which performance in future
years can be benchmarked The energy security indicators in this report derive
from  consultative process involving representatives of PICTs, regional
organisations, the private sector and development partners The process
culminated in the adoption of IPESP and its monitoring and evaluation framework,
the energy security indicators, at the Inaugural Regional Meeting of Ministers
of Energy, ICT and Transport in April Solomone Fifita DeputyDirector (Energy),
Economic Development Division, SPC As  first attempt to improve the transparency
and accountability in the energy sector, there is obvious room for improvement
Access to reliable and sufficient data is  common problem and this monitoring
and evaluation tool can only get better with the kind assistance of the
custodians of the energy sector data Solomone Fifita Deputy Director (Energy),
Economic Development Division, SPC The Implementation Plan for Energy Security
in the Pacific (IPESP) (2011–2015) is  five-year plan for pursuing the vision,
goal and outcomes of FAESP It reflects the priority regional activities that are
to be collectively delivered by the participating members of the Council of
Regional Organisations in the Pacific (CROP) to support, complement and add
value to national efforts on energy security vi Fiji  ount ry Ener gy Secur it
Indi ca tor   ofi   2009 Abbreviations ADB HIES Asian Development Bank household
income and expenditure survey PV photo voltaic ADO automotive diesel oil PWD
Public Works Department HFO heavy fuel oil Ave average RE renewable energy IPP
independent power producer CDB China Development Bank RET renewable energy
technology IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature CO2 carbon
dioxide SEFP Sustainable Energy Financing Project DPK dual purpose kerosene km
kilometre SHS solar home systems  estimate LPG liquefied petroleum gas SIS Forum
small island states – Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Palau, RMI & Tuvalu
EESLI Ecosystems, Environment and Sustainable Livelihoods Initiative MEPS
minimum energy performance standards EEZ exclusive economic zone MJ megajoules
SPREP – PIGGAREP Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme –
Pacific Islands Greenhouse Gas Abatement through Renewable Energy Project FAESP
Framework for Action on Energy Security in the Pacific  (data) not available /
(indicator) not applicable FDoE Fiji Department of Energy Non-SIS Non-Forum
small island state members – Fiji, FSM, PNG, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga &
Vanuatu FEA Fiji Electricity Authority ULP unleaded petrol (another name for
motor gasoline) 14 FICs Forum Island countries (SIS and non-SIS affiliation)
UNDP United Nations Development Programme PICs Pacific Island countries FNU Fiji
National University PPA Pacific Power Association UNFCCC United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change FSC Fiji Sugar Corporation ppm parts per
million GDP gross domestic product USP University of the South Pacific PRISM
Pacific Regional Information System, Statistics for Development at the
Secretariat of the Pacific Community GHG greenhouse gases GJ gigajoules GWh giga
Watt hours vii Fiji  ountry Energy Secu rity In dic  tor  ro fil   00  Country
profile Fiji National Energy Policy Vision 2006 ‘ sustainable energy sector for
Fiji’ Country Fiji Capital Suva Capital island Viti Levu Population 843888
(PRISM estimate); 837,271 (2007 census) 18,333 km2 Land area Max height above
sea-level 1324  (Mount Tomanivi) Geography Fiji consists of approximately 330
islands, of which around 105 are inhabited Over 87% of the land is concentrated
in the two volcanic islands of Viti Levu (10,429 sq km) and Vanua Levu (5556 sq
km) The six largest islands account for over 93% of all land areas in Fiji
Location Between longitudes °  and °  and latitudes 12°  and 22°  EEZ ,260,000
km2  Fiji  ount ry Ener gy Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi   2009 Climate Fiji has
tropical oceanic climate with the tempering influence of the prevalent southeast
trade winds There are two seasons in Fiji: the drier months are from May to
October and the wetter, more humid months, are from November to April During the
latter season, Fiji can experience occasional severe tropical storms and
hurricanes Rainfall Rainfall varies across Fiji; the windward sides of the
larger islands are extremely wet while leeward sides have considerably less
rainfall The range is from approximately 440 mm in the west to 1120 mm in the
southeast per annum Mean temperature 28° Economic Diverse with strong tourism
sector, sugar, agriculture, garment and mining industry; exports include sugar,
garments, gold, coconut products, tropical fruits, root crops, vegetables,
beverages, fish and timber products GDP per capita USD ,947 Currency Fiji dollar
– FJD Exchange rate FJD/USD – $5119 (OANDA) Language English, -Taukei and Hindi
Other minor local languages include Rotuman, Banaban (Rabi Island) and Tuvaluan
(Kioa Island) Government Independent state since 1970 Country representative to
SPC Permanent Secretary Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation Level , South Wing BLV Complex, 87 Queen Elizabeth Drive, Nasese,
Suva Tel: (679) 330 9645 Fax: (679) 330 1741 Email:
saiporamataikabara@govnetgovfj  Fiji Country Energy Secu rity In dic  tor Pro
fil   009 Energy context Energy consumption in Fiji like the rest of PICTs is
heavily dependent on petroleum fuels, which roughly account for over 91% of the
country’ consumption Liquid petroleum fuel is currently supplied to Fiji by
three multinational petroleum companies (Pacific Energy, Mobil and Total), which
ship fuel in medium range tankers mainly from Singapore and South Korea In 2009,
around 259 million litres of diesel, 58 million litres of petrol, 191 million
litres of kerosene and 16 kilo tonnes of liquified petroleum gas (LPG) were
imported into the country LPG is mainly imported from Australia by Fiji Gas and
Blue Gas Fuel import for 2009 stood in the vicinity of USD 345 million dollars
with the current gross domestic product (GDP) of USD 48 billion dollars Fiji
also re-exports fuels to  number of small PICs such as Tuvalu and Tonga The
transport sector (land, maritime and air) is perceived as the major sector that
consumes fuel imported to Fiji accounting for some 70% of the fuel consumed
Other petroleum fuel products such as heavy fuel oil are also imported to Fiji
For the power sector, around 72% of households in Fiji are connected to the
electricity grid network provided by the Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA) In
2009, FEA generated 777 GWh of electricity, of which 715 GWh was sold, and
recorded an estimated 11% distribution loss Electricity is supplied by FEA to
the two biggest islands (Viti Levu and Vanua Levu) and also the island of Ovalau
Of the electricity generated in 2009, 61% was sourced from renewable energy, of
which hydro contributed 58%, wind % and % from bagasse and biomass supplied by
the independent power producers — Fiji Sugar Corporation and Tropic Woods
Limited Around 75 million litres of diesel fuel and heavy fuel oil were consumed
for electricity generation in For areas not supplied by FEA, the Public Works
Department (PWD) provides power supply to government stations at rural and outer
islands whilst the FDOE’ Rural Electrification Unit targets rural villages and
communities installing diesel and micro hydro mini-grid systems, including solar
home systems In 2009, over 20,000 households in Fiji have been identified to be
in access of small scale power The 2009 baseline energy security indicators
presented in this report are compiled and structured according to the four key
outcomes to energy security and the seven action themes of FAESP Graphical
comparison included in the analysis provides  snapshot of Fiji’ situation
compared to other Forum small island states (SIS) and Forum Island countries
Fiji  ount ry Ener gy Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi   2009 FAESP key energy
security outcome  – access to energy No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes
Electrification rate (%) 72 The indicator tracks the share of households
actually connected to  utility grid Household income and expenditure survey
(HIES) 2008–2009 places grid connection at around 72% of the population  Access
to small scale power rural (%) 12 The indicator tracks the share of rural
households with access to basic electrification (solar, pico hydro, small wind,
community grid) The following accounts for the mini-grid connections in
government stations that are operated by PWD and the rural electrification
projects that are managed by FDOE Access to small scale power is usually not
24-hour access  Access to modern energy rural (%) 86 The indicator tracks share
of rural households with access to modern cooking and lighting, which
specifically covers all forms of energy other than traditional biomass HIES
2008–2009: Access to modern forms of cooking in rural areas is 71% Estimated
access to modern forms of lighting in rural areas is 100% Estimate provided is
the average calculated from access to modern lighting and cooking  Access to
modern energy urban (%) 96 The indicator tracks share of urban households with
access to modern cooking and lighting, which specifically covers all forms of
energy other than traditional biomass HIES 2008–2009: Access to modern forms of
cooking in urban areas is 91% Estimated access to modern forms of lighting in
urban areas is 100% Estimate provided is the average calculated from access to
modern lighting and cooking  Fiji Country Energy Secu rity In dic  tor Pro fil
009 Access to small scale power rural Electrification rate 12% 80% 10% 60% % 12%
72% 40% % % % % 20% 23% 22% % % % Fiji Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs Fiji Ave non SIS
Ave 14 FICs Access to modern energy rural Access to modern energy urban 100% %
96% 80% % 76% 60% 77% % 86% 40% % 36% 36% 20% % % % Fiji Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs
Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs Fiji  Fiji  ount ry Ener gy Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi
2009 FAESP key energy security outcome  – affordability No FAESP indicators
Explanatory notes 33 The indicator tracks fuel imports as  percentage of GDP The
higher the figure, the more vulnerable an economy is towards world market price
volatility The following figure was calculated from reference data provided by
the Fiji Bureau of Statistics website: Fuel imports over total GDP for 2009 were
USD 344,955,540 / USD ,487,066,Fuel imports calculated in this analysis is
accounted from diesel (ADO and IDO), motor gasoline (Mogas), dual purpose
kerosene (DPK) and LPG  Macro-economic affordability (percentage)  Electricity
tariff (USD/kWh) 17 The indicator tracks average tariffs for the year (all
tariff categories,  residential, commercial and industrial) Requires averaging
during the year as tariffs in most PICs are adjusted several times in  year
Refer to the table on the right for reference calculation of the average tariff
Electricity tariff 17 Commercial block USD/kWh 19 Industrial block USD/kWh 19
Residential block USD/kWh 12 -250 kWh USD/kWh 11 >250 USD/kWh 12 Lifeline % %
Referenced electricity tariff calculation based on FEA data  Relation between
average tariff and lifeline tariff if  lifeline tariff exists Refer to the table
on the right for reference calculation of the electricity lifeline Electricity
lifeline (%)  Household energy expenditure load (%) 25 The indicator tracks
average household expenditure for energy per year as  percentage of average
household income The analysis was based on the 2008–2009 HIES Reporting gives
breakdown of annual expenditure from the calculation of the total household
operation expenditure and total transport expenditure  Fiji Country Energy Secu
rity In dic  tor Pro fil   009 Macro-economic affordability 14% 12% % 10% % %
Household energy expenditure load % % % % 25% % % Fiji Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs
20% 15% % Electricity tariff 10% % % $35 $40 $33 % $30 Fiji Ave non SIS Ave 14
FICs    /    $17 $20 $10 $00 Fiji Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs  Fiji  ount ry Ener gy
Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi   2009 FAESP key energy security outcome  –
efficiency and productivity No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes  Energy
intensity (MJ/USD)  The indicator tracks the amount of energy utilised to
produce  USD of GDP 10 Productive power use (%) The indicator tracks the share
of commercial and industrial use of electricity in total supply Data calculated
from the financial summary of the FEA 2009 Annual Report Productive power use
Energy intensity 00          71% % 00 $             % 70%     /  $    00 $  69%
% 00  %  68% 00 00 67% Fiji Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs Fiji Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs
Fiji Country Energy Secu rity In dic  tor Pro fil   009 Provided below are
energy intensity graphs that are presented in terms of electricity (kWh) and
fuel (GJ) consumption against GDP when seen on  per capita comparison Countries
identified above the trend line are perceived to have higher than average energy
consumption levels per person when compared against the corresponding economic
wealth [GDP per capita] In other words or simply speaking, countries above the
trend line are considered to be relatively energy inefficient as compared to
countries below the trend line Energy intensity – kWh of electricity consumed to
produce  USD GDP per capita Energy intensity – GJ of import fuel consumed to
produce  USD GDP per capita 100 3500 )     /       /   Palau Palau 90 3000 80
2500 70     /       /    Niue Cook Islands 60 2000 (        Niue 50 Cook Islands
1500 40 RMI Nauru 30 Nauru 1000  RMI Fiji         Fiji Tonga 20 Samoa FSM FSM
Tuvalu Samoa Tuvalu 500  10 Solomon PNG Tonga Kiribati Vanuatu Vanuatu Kiribati
PNG Solomon  $ $,000 $,000 $,000 $,000 $10,000 $12,000 $ $,000 $,000 $,000 $,000
$10,000 $12,000 GDP/capita/year GDP/capita/year – USD  Fiji  ount ry Ener gy
Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi   2009 FAESP key energy security outcome  –
environmental quality No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 11 Carbon footprint
(tonnes of CO2) 1331228 The indicator tracks total GHG emissions using embedded
carbon as  measure (not UNFCCC method) Embedded CO2 calculated is only based on
the following fuel imported — diesel (ADO and IDO), kerosene (DPK), motor
gasoline (Mogas or ULP) and cooking gas (LPG) 12 Diesel fuel quality (ppm ) 500
The indicator assesses the standard for sulphur () content of diesel fuel in
parts per million (ppm) sulphur Endorsed in July 2009 under the fuel trade
standards, the sulphur content for all fuel imported into Fiji was lowered from
5000 ppm to 500 ppm Fiji also imports heavy fuel oil, which has very high
sulphur content Carbon footprint Carbon footprint per capita 7000 50 ,702
/                    ,250 14                     6000 00 04 5000 50 4000 00 58
50 3000 00 2000 ,331   50 1000  00  tot non SIS members Fiji tot 14 FICs Fiji
Tot non SIS members Tot 14 FICs 10 Fiji Country Energy Secu rity In dic  tor Pro
fil   009 FAESP action theme  – Leadership, governance, coordination and
partnership No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 13 Status of energy
administration (score)  The indicator assesses the status the energy
administration has in the country (Score system: Energy ministry = ; Energy
department = ; Energy office = ) FDOE is under the Ministry of Works, Transport
and Public Utilities FDOE is the government’ focal point for Fiji’ energy
sector, energy policy development and oversight of off-grid rural
electrification work FEA is responsible for electricity supply nationally and
operates on the islands of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu and Ovalau PWD is responsible
for the electrification of government stations in remote and outer islands There
are three petroleum companies (Mobil, Total and Pacific Energy) that import
petroleum products into Fiji LPG is imported by Fiji Gas and Blue Gas
Electricity and fuel prices are regulated by the Commerce Commission 14 Energy
legislation (score)  The indicator assesses the status of the energy sector
legislation in the country (Score system: Updated energy act = ; Adopted energy
policy = ; Subsector act or policy = ) There is no energy act for Fiji However,
the following policies and legislation guide the energy sector administration:
the endorsed National Energy Policy and Action Plan 2006; the Rural
Electrification Policy 1993, which allows FDOE to undertake the administration
and control of the rural electrification programme; the Electricity Act (Ca
1980); the Petroleum Act (Cap 190); the Fuel and Power Emergency Act (Cap 191);
the Public Enterprise Act 1996; the Commerce Act 1998, the Electricity Reform
Bill 1998; the Environment Management Act 2005; the Public Private Partnership
Act 2006; and the Renewable Energy service Company (RESCO) Bill 15 Co-ordination
and consultation (score)  The indicator aims to measure how decisions and
directions given at regional or subregional events translate into practical
action at national level (Score system: Meetings lead to relevant national
action = ; No action = ) Fiji actively participates in regional activities; is
utility member of PPA Clear sense of collaboration among key energy stakeholders
in the country 11 Fiji  ount ry Ener gy Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi   2009 FAESP
action theme  – Capacity development, planning, policy and regulatory frameworks
No FAESP Explanatory notes indicators 16 Energy planning status (score)  The
indicator assesses the state/quality of energy planning It distinguishes between
integrated planning and subsector ( power, petroleum) planning (Score system:
Whole of energy sector plan/roadmap operational with & framework = ; Subsector
plan operational with & framework = ; Energy sector plans in preparation = )
Endorsed National Energy Policy and Action Plan is comprehensive; FEA has
rolling development plan; National Strategic Development Plan 17 Energy sector
regulation (score)  The indicator assesses energy sector regulation It measures
the progress towards  regulator independent of government or regulated entities
(Score system: Independent whole of energy sector regulator established = ;
Whole of energy sector regulator established = ; Subsector regulator established
= ) Regulatory roles governed under the Commerce Commission for electricity and
fuel prices LPG prices are not fully regulated 18 Enabling framework for private
sector participation (score)  The indicator assesses progress towards an
enabling framework for private sector participation in selling electricity to
the grid (Score system: Standard power purchase and petroleum supply agreements
operational = : Standard agreements for subsector operational = ; Standard
agreements in preparation = ) No specific legislation in place FEA has full
authority over the inclusion of IPPs to supply into their grids The current
inclusion of IPPs such as FSC, Vatukoula Gold Mines and Tropic Woods into the
FEA supply line is based on tariff purchases that are determined by FEA The
Hotels Aid Act provides some allowance for the inclusion of hotels to sell
excess electricity to the FEA grid 19 Private sector contribution (%)  The
indicator tracks the share of electricity produced by independent power
producers under  power purchase agreement The average generation mix for 2009
was 58% hydro, 25% diesel, 14% heavy fuel oil, % wind with the other % provided
by the independent power producers — Tropik Woods and Fiji Sugar Corporation
(FEA 2009 Annual Report) 12 Fiji Country Energy Secu rity In dic  tor Pro fil
009 FAESP action theme  – Energy production and supply  Petroleum and
alternative fuels No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 20 Fuel supply security
(days) 70 The indicator measures the number of days  country can keep operating
in case of  petroleum product supply interruption Calculation used if actual
data is not available (Size of total petroleum storage (m3)/Average petroleum
product consumption per day) Indicative estimate established during the National
Planning and Policy Workshop in Oct ober Collection of fuel storage capacity
data from the petroleum companies was not possible during the compilation of
this booklet 21 Fuel supply diversity (%)  The indicator measures the share of
locally produced fuel (biofuel or fossil fuel) as  percentage of total supply No
major biofuel projects were undertaken in Fiji in Large scale biofuel production
began in 2010 on the island of Koro 22 Fuel supply chain arrangements (score)
The indicator assesses control of countries over fuel supply chain (Score
system: Joint procurement scheme operational = ; Participation in preparation of
joint procurement arrangements = ) No joint fuel procurement arrangement Fuel
imported is directly under the multinational petroleum companies — Pacific
Energy, Mobil and Total — with importation mainly via South Korea and Singapore
LPG imports are mostly from Australia 13 Fiji  ount ry Ener gy Secur it  Indi ca
tor   ofi   2009  Renewable energy No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 23
Renewable energy share (%) 81 The indicator measures the share of renewable
energy as  percentage of total supply for  given year Referenced calculation
takes into account only the RE supplied by FEA as presented in their 2009 Annual
Report Contribution from other RE systems installed by FDOE and PWD was not
ascertained 24 Renewable resource knowledge (score)  The indicator assesses the
quality of knowledge of national renewable energy potential (Score system:
Comprehensive assessment of all RE resources including cost for each source = ;
Comprehensive physical assessment of all RE resources = ; Resource assessments
fragmentary, under way = ) Extensive data sets and study reports available on
renewable energy resources: solar PV systems, hydro, wind, biomass, biogas and
biofuel On-going monitoring and assessments undertaken for wind, ocean and
biofuel Available reports can be accessed from ADB, World Bank, FDOE, FEA, SPC,
UNDP, IUCN, SPREP-PIGGAREP, USP and FNU 25 Least-cost RE development plan
(score)  The indicator assesses if data and information on RE have been
translated into  least-cost development plan that gives priority to the most
economical RE resource or application (Score system: Least-cost development plan
operational = ; Least-cost development plan in preparation = ) No specific
least-cost development plan in place but priority activities identified in
national policy and action plan 14 Fiji Country Energy Secu rity In dic  tor Pro
fil   009 FAESP action theme  – Energy conversion  Electric power No FAESP
indicators Explanatory notes 26 Generation efficiency (kWh/) 10 The indicator
measures the annual average fuel conversion efficiency for diesel generation in
power utilities Referenced figure was calculated for the diesel generators from
FEA only Source: FEA annual report 27 Distribution losses (%) 11 The indicator
compares the amount of kWh sold with the amount of kWh sent out from the power
station Indicative estimate provided during discussion at the National Planning
and Policy Workshop in October 28 Lost supply (SAIDI) – (hours) The indicator
tracks electricity outage time (hours of lost supply per customer per year)
Referenced data sourced from the ‘Performance Benchmarking for Pacific Power
Utilities Report’ 29 Clean electricity contribution (%) 61 The indicator
measures the share of renewable energies as  percentage of total electricity
supply Percentage calculated is from the FEA 2009 Annual Report 15 Fiji  ount ry
Ener gy Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi   2009 FAESP action theme  – End-use energy
consumption  Transport energy use |  Energy efficiency and conservation No FAESP
indicators Explanatory notes 30 Retail fuel prices Retail price Wholesale price
The indicator tracks retail and wholesale fuel prices for petroleum products
(diesel, petrol, MPK, LPG) USD/ - ADO USD/ - ULP USD/ - DPK USD/kg - LPG 70 82
60 62 80 95 64 82 Sourced from – Commerce Commission Sourced from – Commerce
Commission Sourced from – Commerce Commission Sourced from – Commerce Commission
31 Legislative framework (score)  The indicator assesses progress towards
comprehensive legislative framework for import of end use devices (Score system:
Comprehensive framework covering transport, appliances, buildings = ;
Legislative for one subsector operational = ; Preparation of frameworks under
way = ) No specific legislative framework was in place in 2009 to regulate end-
use devices Fiji began implementing  number of energy efficiency activities from
Listed are some of the achievements made — import subsidies on RET, EE
technologies and small engine sizes in 2010 and the Fiji MEPS programme in 32
Appliance labelling (score)  The indicator assesses the state of appliance
labelling (Score system: Compulsory appliance labelling operational = ;
Appliance labelling in preparation = ) Fiji has undertaken extensive study and
awareness work on appliance labelling since Adopted the AUS/NZ MEPS standards
for refrigerators and freezers in 2006 with  voluntary labelling programme
underway in 16 Fiji Country Energy Secu rity In dic  tor Pro fil   009 FAESP
action theme  – Energy data and information No FAESP indicators Explanatory
notes 33 Availability of national energy balance (score)  The indicator assesses
availability of national key energy data to SPC data management unit and other
regional stakeholders (Score system: Comprehensive data sets covering energy
input conversion and end use available  months after end of reporting year = ;
Partial data set available within  months = ; Partial data set available within
12 months = ) National energy balance and statistics booklet are till
Comprehensive data-set on power and renewable energy available Need for updating
petroleum consumption data 17 Fiji  ount ry Ener gy Secur it  Indi ca tor   ofi
2009 FAESP action theme  – Financing, monitoring & evaluation No FAESP
indicators Explanatory notes 34 Energy portfolio (USD) 70,000,000 The indicator
tracks the flow of funding into the country’ energy sector Grant aid commitments
+ loan commitments Limited data were available on the grant contribution into
Fiji’ energy sector Most of these data related to regional initiatives such as
the Pacific Islands Greenhouse Gas Abatement through Renewable Energy Project
(PIGGAREP), the Sustainable Energy Financing Project (SEFP) and the Ecosystems
Environment and Sustainable Livelihoods Initiative (EESLI) Together with
national-level projects, it is estimated that approximately USD  million were
made available to the Fiji energy sector in grant aid commitments in the period
2009 to In terms of loan commitments, in 2009, FEA undertook  number of loans
for the development of the USD 150 million Nadarivatu Hydropower project Of this
amount, FEA received USD 70 million in concessional loan finance from the China
Development Bank (CDB) 35 Availability of financing information (score)  The
indicator assesses availability of national energy financing information to SPC
and other regional stakeholders(Score system: Comprehensive set of information
covering petroleum, utility and government financing = ; Partial information set
available within  months = ; Partial information set available within 12 months
= ) Financial data records of funded projects are available at FDOE where
indicative estimates of the latest spending can be easily provided Detailed
financial accounts from the department’ account office will take  month or two
36 Monitoring framework (score)  The indicator assesses if there is  national
energy sector & framework in place (Score system: & framework in place = , No &
framework =  ) No specific & (monitoring and evaluation) framework in place
Selected & activities available for big funded projects 18 Fiji Country Energy
Secu rity In dic  tor Pro fil   009 Fiji energy contacts Fiji Department of
Energy Tel: [679] 3386006 Fax: [679] 3386301 Mr Peceli Nakavulevu Director
Email: PNakavulevu@fdoegovfj Fiji Electricity Authority Tel: [679] 3313333 Fax:
[679] 3311882 Mr Anand Nanjungud Chief Information Officer Email:
AnandN@feacomfj Ministry of Works, Transport & Public Utilities Tel: [679]
3312277 Fax: [679] 3240045 Ms Marica Ratuki Acting Principal Engineer –
Electrical DE Works Central Eastern Email: ratuki@govnetgovfj Fiji Bureau of
Statistics Tel: [679] 3315822 Fax: [679] 3303656 Ms Navilini Singh Statistics
Officer Email: nsingh@statsfijigovfj Fiji Commerce Commission Tel: [679] 3372178
Fax: [679] 3372389 Mr Joel Abraham Senior Research Fellow Email:
jabraham@commcommgovfj Fiji Fuel Retailers Association Mr John Philip Secretary
Email: jphilip@maccom