DP/DCP/FJI/ United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme and of the United Nations Population Fund Distr: General 13 July 2007
Original: English Second regular session 2007 10 to 14 September 2007, New York
Item  of the provisional agenda Country programmes and related matters Draft
multi-country programme document,  Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and
Vanuatu Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction ……………………………………………………………………
Situation analysis……………………………………………………………… -  II III Past cooperation and
lessons learned………………………………………… Proposed programme…………………………………………………………
Programme management, monitoring and evaluation……………………………………………………………………… -
IV   Annex 11 Results and resources framework () ………………………………  () 060807
*0742934* DP/DCP/FJI/ Introduction  The UNDP multi-country programme document
(MCPD)  has been endorsed by the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati,
Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu
following wide stakeholder consultations with governments, civil society,
regional organizations and development partners The MCPD will be implemented by
the UNDP Fiji multi-country office (MCO) and is aligned with the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), country priorities as reflected in national
development plans, the regional United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF)  and the Pacific Plan for regional integration and cooperation
Situation analysis  Pacific island countries (PICs) face common challenges
resulting from their small size, geographic isolation and natural disaster
vulnerability Broadly, Melanesia (Fiji, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu) is
characterized by larger, resource-rich land masses and populations; Polynesia
(Tuvalu and Tonga) by smaller but relatively compact land masses, and Micronesia
(Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Palau and Nauru) by
very small and widely dispersed resource-poor atolls As Small Island Developing
States (SIDS), PICs have committed to the Mauritius Strategy and their National
Sustainable Development Strategies (NSDS) are being increasingly aligned with
the MDGs The Pacific region has been experiencing high levels of poverty and low
levels of economic growth; coupled with low human development gains in past
decades, many PICs are in danger of missing critical MDG ,  and  targets  Even
though over the past decade,  number of PICs have achieved improved
macroeconomic outcomes, this has not translated into rises in per capita incomes
in light of population growth of around  percent in the medium term The
significant net aid inflows to PICs have yet to be integrated in national
planning and budgeting processes Increasingly PICs are focusing on the Pacific
Aid Effectiveness Principles and their capacity for aid coordination and
management, adopting sector wide approaches (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu)
in education and health Ensuring inclusive growth and globalization is
particularly challenging in the least developed countries (Kiribati, Solomon
Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu) Across the region, these problems are compounded by
unfavourable policies and regulatory environment for trade and private sector
development Due to the lack of employment opportunities, increasing hardship and
social instability, inequality has disproportionate  DP/DCP/FJI/ impact on
vulnerable groups, such as rural poor, women and girls, who remain disadvantaged
to varying degrees in education, access to labour markets and political
representation, as well as young people aged , who comprise almost half the
population in some countries In addition, available evidence on HIV infection
rates, especially among people aged , point to the possibility of  rapidly
escalating HIV epidemic and multi-sectoral approaches to prevention, care and
treatment efforts are seen as imperative  Sustainable and equitable economic
growth and poverty reduction are dependent on significant governance
improvements Increasing concerns over alleged abuse of power, corruption and
cronyism has contributed to instability and conflict and  failure to uphold
human rights Accountability institutions are often under-resourced and/or poorly
functioning Although decentralization and participatory decision making are
being enhanced in small atoll countries such as Kiribati and Tuvalu, mechanisms
to encourage full and real participation by women and minority groups are
largely lacking Leveraging information and communication technology (ICT) for
local government and outer island planning and management requires action As in
various PICs, the value of broad-based civic education programmes is
increasingly recognized Civil society organizations (CSOs) are increasingly seen
as key partners by governments and donors in governance and human rights
education While many PICs have ratified key human rights conventions, there are
shortcomings in reporting All countries but three have ratified the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and have
national plans of action to promote gender equality and strategies to address
gender-based violence, but most do not have legal and institutional mechanisms
to implement them  Exposure to natural hazards such as volcanoes, tsunami’,
cyclones, earthquakes (Solomon Islands and Vanuatu who are among the most
disaster prone countries in the world) and experiences of civil unrest and
conflict over the past decade (Fiji, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu), have
highlighted the need to focus more strongly on disaster risk reduction, peace
and stability dialogues, early warning systems, and the role of women in crisis
prevention and recovery In the long-term, it is increasingly recognized that
democratic governance and poverty reduction are key in preventing potential
conflicts Tensions between traditional and modern systems of governance
contribute to this pattern or curtail effective mitigation as seen in Tonga and
in Fiji The Solomon Islands experienced instability due to ethnic tension and
civil unrest from 1999 to Stability and an environment conducive to the
strengthening of Solomon Island’ peace architecture have emerged from various
interventions, including the Australian-led Regional Assistance Mission to the
Solomon Islands (RAMSI) The recent  DP/DCP/FJI/ political crisis in Fiji and the
Secretary General’ call for an early return to democracy, indicate the need for
an enhanced focus on good governance, peace dialogue and building community
resilience  Almost all PICs rely heavily on primary commodity production and
exports, marine-based resources, and tourism, highlighting community-based
management of natural resources and maintenance of the environment as  key to
growth and poverty reduction Competing demands on the environment and
differentiated impacts of climate change (Kiribati and Tuvalu), waste management
(Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati and Marshall Islands), and poor
natural resource management pose significant challenges to all PICs due to their
limited resource base Contributing factors include: limited integration and non-
implementation of environment in national or sectoral plans and strategies, non-
existent or outdated environmental legislation, limited documentation of
traditional practices, and inadequate capacities of communities to practice
responsible and equitable harvesting of natural resources Concerns about
improving equitable access to natural resources, including renewable energy, to
enable opportunities for sustainable livelihood options require special
consideration given the patrilineal nature of most Pacific societies
Increasingly, environmental policy is mainstreamed into national and regional
agreements and frameworks, such as the Micronesia Challenge  Stronger regional
cooperation presents opportunities for countries with constrained capacity to
implement effective national policies and provide basic services to meet the
needs of their people The Pacific Plan has established  framework to support
national development policies, including commitments to the MDGs The relatively
small circle of development partners in the Pacific can enhance the way aid is
delivered and managed in line with the Paris Declaration and the Pacific
Principles on Aid Effectiveness Key country indicators Fiji FSM Kiribati RMI
Nauru Palau Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu 18,274 ,260,000 905,949   758
90 Middle 2004 702 ,900,000 108,500 28  / 726 ,600,000 105,432 24  / 181
,100,000 60,422 25  / 21 320,000 13,287 81 - / 459 600,000 19,949 31  / 28,896
,600,000 552,438 61  592 128 748 700,000 114,689 01  815 55 LDC Middle 2005 2005
26 760,000 11,810 51  / 12,189 680,000 208,869 49  670 119 LDC 2005 Land Area
(sq km) EEZ (sq km) Population Growth rate (%) GDP growth (05, %) HDI 2006 rank,
out of 177 Country status MDG Report Human Rights Treaties/Conventions ratified
• CEDAW • CRC • CERD Middle Draft LDC Draft Middle Middle NA NCC Draft LDC 2006
Draft  √ √  √   √ √ √ √  √ √  √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √  √ √  √ √   DP/DCP/FJI/ Sources:
UNDP Human Development Report 2006; 2006 Country Background Notes, UNDP Fiji;
Asian Development Outlook 2006 Update, Asian Development Bank; Pacific Islands
Forum Secretariat II Past cooperation and lessons learned  Under the previous
programme cycle, UNDP support was prioritized under three related areas: ()
Poverty reduction and sustainable livelihoods for MDGs achievement: facilitating
financial services for the poor in Fiji, Vanuatu and Marshall Islands; policy
development for inclusive growth and globalization in Palau, Marshall Islands
and Federated States of Micronesia; sustainable livelihoods in Marshall Islands
() Democratic governance and human rights through parliamentary strengthening in
Fiji, Solomon Islands and Marshall Islands; decentralization and local
governance in Tuvalu and Kiribati; participatory democracy and civic education
in Tonga; peace and stability in Fiji and Solomon Islands; human rights advocacy
for policy development and community education, and HIV/AIDS across the region
() Environmental protection and resource management through programmes in
environmental governance, climate change, biodiversity, energy and waste
management with differentiated focus in the 10 PICs  key focus has been on
assisting countries to meet their obligations under various multilateral and
regional environment agreements (MEAs)  Tripartite Project Reviews (TPRs) and
project evaluations confirm the emphasis of the previous cycle, with some
adjustments needed to fine-tune the future programme These include the need to:
() Adopt  more strategic and targeted focus on key outcomes to maximize impact
Programme effectiveness has been challenged by the unique role of the MCO to
spread resources across 10 countries Clear programme objectives, realistic
targets, measurable indicators and appropriate sequencing of capacity, culture
and gender disparities need to be prioritized () Ensure national commitment to
and ownership of programmes, use of national development frameworks and systems
in consultative processes, more frequent country visits, and continued training
at national, regional and international levels An expanded joint United Nations
presence in countries will improve UNDP’ engagement in national development
dialogue and development support services () Build stronger partnerships at the
highest levels While improved coordination with other  DP/DCP/FJI/ partners was
noted achievement, programmatic linkages with other United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes working in the region and with the Council of Regional
Organizations of the Pacific (CROP) have been relatively weak Enhanced donor
partnerships will help to continue the recent trend of improved resource
mobilization III Proposed programme Taking into account lessons learned in the
past programming cycle, the MCPD  seeks to respond to current and emerging
development challenges of PICs, through continued emphasis on capacity
development; stronger partnerships at national level and robust engagement and
coordination with key stakeholders; strategic programmatic focus and leveraging
of regular resources in high impact areas; and strengthening regional and
national linkages to support the Pacific Plan In alignment with the UNDAF, the
goal of the MCPD is to achieve the MDGs through building resilient and inclusive
societies, based on four key inter-related outcome areas of poverty reduction
and the Millennium Development Goals, good governance and human rights, crisis
prevention and recovery, and environment and sustainable management across the
ten countries Outcome  Poverty reduction and the Millennium Development Goals
UNDP will assist PICs in developing and implement evidence-based and inclusive
NSDS to stimulate inclusive economic growth, facilitate inclusive globalization
and promote sustainable livelihoods through support to: () formulation and
implementation of national and sectoral plans and strategies aligned with MDGs,
targets and indicators and clearly linked to national budgets; () strengthening
capacity of national statistical systems to generate disaggregated poverty data
and analyses; () Improving Aid Management systems linking to national plans and
budgets; () facilitation of inclusive and equitable trade mechanisms, private
sector partnerships, employment generation policies and enhancing financial
competencies; and () multi-sectoral planning and leadership capacity development
to enhance the engagement of communities and decision makers at all levels to
take immediate action on HIV and AIDS Country level programmatic activities will
take into account intra-regional socio-economic patterns and variations, with
special emphasis on the least developed countries (Kiribati, Solomon Islands,
Tuvalu and Vanuatu), as well as on women and other vulnerable groups across the
region  DP/DCP/FJI/ Outcome  Good governance and human rights UNDP will
strengthen national policy capacities and governance systems to exercise the
principles of inclusive, equitable, participatory, transparent and accountable
governance and respect for human rights; and will support the role of resilient
Pacific communities in decision-making at all levels Specific programmatic
activities will be geared towards: () countries demonstrating and upholding the
Forum principles of good leadership and accountability; () enhancing
decentralization of governance, information and communication technology (ICT)
development, and participatory decision making targeting vulnerable groups; and
() awareness of human rights and the availability of mechanisms to claim them
The focus will be on enhancing participatory democracy through civic and human
rights education in all countries of the Pacific; decentralized governance for
development and participatory decision making in Kiribati, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu; and parliamentary support, subject to the evolving
priorities and demands of the Pacific countries Outcome  Crisis prevention and
recovery UNDP will assist countries to strengthen capacity to prevent and manage
crises and build resilience to the impact of tensions and disasters This will be
achieved through: () support to the development of an integrated approach to
addressing and reducing vulnerability to tension and disaster; () effective
recovery strategies that seek to build capacity to address the root causes of
humanitarian crisis and natural disasters; and () addressing the long term
livelihood needs of communities UNDP will focus on formalizing institutional
mechanisms for mainstreaming disaster risk reduction into national development
and budgetary strategies (in Solomon Islands and Vanuatu); and development and
implementation of national policies and plans addressing human security through
conflict-sensitive analysis and tension reduction interventions (in Fiji,
Marshall Islands, Tonga and Solomon Islands) Outcome  Environment and
sustainable management UNDP will leverage global expertise and resources, and
utilize innovative approaches to support  more resilient region with
strengthened capacity for sustainable management of environment and natural
resources through: () the mainstreaming of environmental sustainability and
sustainable energy into national policies, planning frameworks and programmes
(in all countries of the Pacific); and () strengthening institutional support,
including indigenous governance systems, to contribute to sustainable
environmental management and usage through appropriate policies, legislation and
DP/DCP/FJI/ traditional knowledge and practices for enhanced sustainable
livelihoods (in Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu) The focus will be
on environmental governance, including promotion of sustainable renewable energy
and adaptation to climate change into national strategies, as well as improving
access to and management of multilateral environment agreements (MEAs)
Programmatic activities will further focus on partnerships and capacity
development in order to strengthen the nexus among poverty reduction,
sustainable environmental management and gender equity The Global Environment
Facility Small Grants Programme-NZAID Pacific Environment Fund model will be
examined for the possible up-scaling of pilot projects, including the potential
for further support for renewable energy and adaptation to climate change
projects Cross-cutting themes and joint programmes UNDP programming will address
the linkages between these four objectives, and mainstream key cross-cutting
themes into country-specific priorities This includes the promotion of human
rights and protecting the dignity and integrity of all people; gender equity,
guided by the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Violence against
Women and the Pacific Platform for Action on the Advancement of Women and Gender
Equality ; and promoting volunteerism Joint programmes will support national
development, linkages and cohesion in the areas of HIV/AIDS, young people,
national planning for MDG achievement, support to civil society, and, subject to
inter- agency agreement, environmental and disaster risk management IV Programme
management, monitoring and evaluation  Implementation The MCPD and the results
framework will form the basis of agreed Country Programme Action Plans for the
10 PICs, and will be reviewed annually Implementation, primarily through
National Execution (NEX), will help reduce the transaction costs of governments,
establish clear accountability and oversight structures and maximize efficient
and effective programme delivery through results- based management methodologies
Where national capacity is constrained, alternative execution modalities such as
Direct Execution (DEX) will be explored Delivery of the MCPD will be underpinned
by the expanded joint United Nations expanded presence, under reciprocity
arrangements with UNFPA and UNICEF in Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati,
Nauru Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu With in-
DP/DCP/FJI/ house expertise in key programme areas, the Fiji MCO will provide
support services, training and advice to implementation partners in project
formulation, implementation, monitoring, human rights- based approaches and
gender-sensitive programming Formulation of joint programmes, advice and support
from the Pacific Centre in Fiji, as well as from the United Nations Volunteers
(UNV) programme, will be leveraged to enhance programme effectiveness
Monitoring and evaluation Overall progress of the MCPD implementation will be
measured under the MCPD Evaluation plan and through independent and
participatory monitoring and evaluation (&) processes Annual Programme reviews
with national implementation partners will track resource allocation, activity
progress and constraints under the overall direction of UNDAF Outcome Boards
Wherever possible, MCPD monitoring and evaluation activities will be aligned
with regional and national & frameworks Appropriate resources and capacity will
be made available for the systematic implementation and dissemination of
evaluation recommendations to emphasize the critical importance of evaluation as
tool for policy engagement and programme monitoring Of the 11 programme outcomes
of the MCPD, four specific outcome evaluations will be undertaken with
Governments and stakeholders throughout the programming period, in line with
UNDP procedures  final evaluation of the implementation of the MCPD in its
entirety will be conducted towards the end of  programming cycle, to inform the
subsequent MCPD  Partnerships and aid effectiveness In support of the resident
coordinator system, UNDP will leverage its resources to lead the harmonization
of United Nations programmes to support reforms under the multi-country UNDAF
Partnerships will be strengthened through coordination and harmonization with
development partners; working with civil society and vulnerable communities; and
through CROP to support national responses under the Pacific Plan The MCPD will
strive to build national capacity for aid management, and simplification and
harmonization of aid delivery in accordance with the Pacific Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness Operational tools, such as the Harmonized Approach to Cash
Transfers, will be used to facilitate collaborative donor procedures in
alignment with national processes and institutional capacities  DP/DCP/FJI/
Resource mobilization Total resource requirements of the MCPD are estimated at
$52 million, of which $ million constitutes existing pipeline commitments and
carry over from the current cycle, resulting in $49 million of net resource
requirements for the new programming cycle This scope of programmatic engagement
will be supported by funding from regular resources (TRAC) in the amount of $
million, with other resources contributing an estimated $20 million from GEF,
and $10 million from UNDEF, DGTF and other thematic trust funds The remainder of
$11 million is to be mobilized through government and third party cost-sharing
Multi-country office staffing and structure Building on results accomplished
through previous re-organizations, the MCO will continue to fine-tune its
internal structure, seeking to strengthen accountability for results, programme
efficiency and operational efficiency The Solomon Islands Programme
Implementation Office (to be mainstreamed under the biennium support budget)
will be headed by  Deputy Resident Representative, who also will have managerial
and representational responsibilities for the joint office Presence of UNDP,
UNFPA and UNICEF In addition, on behalf of UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF the MCO will
establish joint presence in Nauru, Palau and Tuvalu to be funded initially from
regional programme resources Staffing implications of an expanded presence in
the Pacific and operational capacity requirements of the envisaged programme
growth will be considered prior to and at the beginning of the new cycle 10
Multi-country programme outcome : Poverty reduction and Millennium Development
Goals Pacific UNDAF outcome : Equitable economic growth and poverty reduction
Pacific UNDAF outcome : Equitable social and protection services Strategic
Priority Multi-country programme outputs Multi-country programme outcomes
Pacific island countries national policies and sustainable development
strategies that are aligned with MDGs, linked to national budgets and based on
strengthened national statistical systems focusing on poverty indicators Output
indicators, baselines, targets Partners Indicative Resources Relevant government
agencies; UN system organizations; CROP agencies; Asian Development Bank (ADB);
Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID); European Union (EU);
New Zealand' International Aid and Development Agency (NZAID); United States
Agency for International Development (USAID); World Bank (WB); civil society
organizations (CSOs) Relevant government agencies, UN-system organizations, CROP
organizations, ADB, AUSAID, financial services providers, International Monetary
Fund (IMF), Pacific Islands Private Sector Organizations (PIPSO), NZAID, EU, WB,
CSOs  Strengthened capacity among policy makers and CSOs to analyse key
development challenges, including poverty, environment and gender issues, and to
incorporate them in MDG-based national policies, plans, budgets and reports
(Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)  Strengthened national statistical
systems generating poverty data and analysis (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu)  Improved Aid Management systems linked to national plans and budgets
(Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu) [] Indicator: # of countries with
MDG costed national plans; % increased budget allocations for MDGs; # of MDG
reports Baseline: At the end of 2007, Pacific LDCs do not have national or
sectoral plans costed or aligned with the MDGs Target: MDG based planning and
budgeting is operational in at least the  LDCs [] Indicator: # of LDCs with
defined national basic needs and poverty lines; poverty analysis impacting on
national policy and planning targets; % decrease in poverty gap ratio for each
PIC Baseline: Pacific LDCs do not have defined national basic needs poverty
lines and paucity of poverty data Target: At least  LDCs have strengthened
national statistical systems generating poverty data and analysis [] Indicator:
# of aid databases and aid management systems strengthened; # of PICs with aid
flows integrated in national plans and budgets Baseline: Low capacities for aid
coordination; aid data unstructured and incomplete; aid flows not related to
national budgets Target: National development policies and strategies supported
by effective aid management systems [] Indicator: # of new trade facilitation-
related legislations, regulations and plans adopted; # of new businesses
registered; % increase in export earnings Baseline: Trade regulatory frameworks
and legislations outdated; trade facilitation systems not meeting international
standards; low export performance Target: Export performance improved at least
in  LDCs [] Indicator: # of urban/rural poor accessing financial services, in
particular women and youth Baseline: 80,000 rural bank accounts (Fiji and
Solomon Islands); 2000 microfinance beneficiaries (Vanuatu) Target: Additional
20,000 people, in particular women and youth, have access to financial services
[] Indicator: # of pilot initiatives/partnerships for employment, income
generation and entrepreneurship development by country; # of youth and women
employed through pilot initiatives; # of pilot initiatives scaled up towards
national impact Baseline: Limited employment opportunities and non-conducive
environment for income generation; lack of opportunity, increasing hardship and
impact on vulnerable groups Target: Increase income generation and employment
opportunities for vulnerable groups, including women and youth in  PICs []
Indicator: # of multi-sectoral national plans on HIV/AIDS developed; # of
decision-makers trained through leadership development program Baseline: Ad-hoc
engagement of leaders and limited national capacity in HIV/AIDS planning and
advocacy at all levels Target: At least 100 men and women leaders trained in
leadership development and strengthening national capacity for multi-sectoral
planning for HIV/AIDS $,648,000 (REGULAR RESOURCES, RR)
$,240,000 (OTHER RESOURCES, OR) TOTAL $,888,000           Improved enabling
environment for trade facilitation and development (Kiribati; Solomon Islands,
Tuvalu, Vanuatu);  Financial competencies of vulnerable groups, including women
and youth, enhanced in urban/rural communities (Kiribati, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Vanuatu);  Partnerships established to facilitate creation of income
generation and employment opportunities for vulnerable groups, with focus on
women and youth (Fiji, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu)  Trade mechanisms, private sector partnerships and employment
generation policies are sustainable and equitable ;
$800,000 (RR) $,430,000 (OR) TOTAL $,230,000 inequality have disproportionate
Ministry of Health and other relevant line ministries and UN departments CROP
organizations, organizations, AusAID, NZAID, people living with HIV/AIDS, CSOs
Strengthened multi-sectoral HIV/AIDS planning and leadership capacity to take
immediate action on HIV/AIDS (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati,
Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)  National policies and plans
for HIV and are AIDS evidence-based and inclusive Mitigating the impact of AIDS
on human development; strengthening governance of AIDS responses $598,000 (RR)
with $700,000 (OR) TOTAL $,298,000 $,046,000 (RR) $,370,000 (OR) TOTAL
$11,416,000 11 Multi-Country Programme Outcome : Good Governance and Human
Rights Pacific UNDAF Outcome : Good Governance and Human Rights Strategic
Priority Multi-Country Programme Outputs Multi-Country Programme Outcomes
Pacific island countries demonstrate and uphold the Forum Principles of Good
Leadership and Accountability, protect human rights and make available
mechanisms to claim them Indicative Resources Output indicators, baselines,
targets Partners Office of the Speaker, Office of the Secretary General,
Parliament Secretariat, Congress, Judiciary, Electoral Commissions, relevant
line ministries and departments with UN organizations (UNICEF,UNIFEM, UNFPA),
CROP organizations, Commonwealth Secretariat, Centre for Democratic Institutes,
AUSAID, EU, NZAID, Transparency International Vanuatu, CSOs  Improved capacity
of national parliaments to enable efficient and effective legislative, oversight
and accountability functions and roles (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu);
Increased representation of women in parliament (Federated States of Micronesia,
Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu);  Participatory democracy and human rights upheld through civic
education (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau,
Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu) [] Indicator: # of
functional parliamentary committees; # of electronic research libraries;
proportion of laws examined and submitted by parliamentary committees Baseline:
Parliamentary functions improved in Solomon Islands and Marshall Islands;
legislative reviews for other PICs identified capacity gaps Target: Pacific men
and women effectively contributing to accountability and oversight through
improved parliamentary functions in  PICs [] Indicator: # of women with seats in
national parliaments and oversight committees; # of political parties putting
forward female candidates for elections Baseline: Representation of women in
parliament across the Pacific less than % Target: Women effectively contributing
to accountability and oversight roles and functions in national parliaments in
PICs [] Indicator: % of population with knowledge of democratic and human
rights; # of countries with well functioning, broad-based and sustained civic
education practices; # of CSOs engaged in civic education in national programmes
Baseline: Limited national capacities for civic education; Civic education
programmes implemented or started in Fiji, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu; Various
CSOs engaged in ad-hoc civic education activities Target: Pacific communities
and people understanding and exercising their democratic and human rights []
Indicator: % increase in local government expenditure; # of participatory local
level plans developed; # of local governments leveraging ICT for planning and
management; % of people actively engaged in councils and traditional systems; #
of local government acts reviewed Baseline: Lack of supportive legislation and
functional structures and systems to enhance participation at local level; in
outer islands sever constraint capacity and lack of delegated resources for
planning and implementation Target: Effective, efficient and accountable Local
Governments and decentralised systems in  PICs                      $,505,000
(RR) $,670,000 (OR)           TOTAL $,175,000              ;
National and provincial governments, relevant line ministries and departments,
national training centres with UN organizations (UNCDF), CROP organizations,
ADB, AUSAID, Commonwealth Secretariat, EU, Japan International Cooperation
Agency (JICA), NZAID, WB, CSOs $,755,000 (RR) $12,070,000 (OR) TOTAL $14,825,000
Participatory mechanisms and strengthened capacity of national and provincial
governments, CSOs and other stakeholders improve national coordination, planning
and management of local development activities, to include transparent and
accountable financial and resource management (Kiribati, Tonga, Solomon Islands,
Tuvalu, Vanuatu)  Decentralisation of governance and participatory decision
making are enhanced $,250,000 (RR) $,400,000 (OR) TOTAL $,650,000 Multi-Country
Programme Outcome : Crisis Prevention and Recovery Pacific UNDAF Outcome : Good
Governance and Human Rights Pacific UNDAF Outcome : Sustainable Environmental
Management Strategic Priority Multi-Country Programme Outputs Output indicators,
baselines, targets Partners Indicative Resources Multi-Country Programme
Outcomes  Disaster risk management and management of responses to humanitarian
crises are effective and integrated into all forms of development Relevant line
ministries and departments with UN organizations, CROP organizations, AUSAID,
NZAID, Waan Aelōn in Majel/Canoes of the Marshall Islands (WAM), Women United
Together in the Marshall Islands  National policies and strategies reviewed
through conflict sensitive analyses; tension reduction projects developed and
implemented (Fiji, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tonga);  Institutional
mechanisms of disaster plans strengthened and disaster risk reduction and
management mainstreamed in national planning and budgeting (Solomon
Islands,Vanuatu) [] Indicator: # of engendered conflict sensitive analysis of
national polices, strategies and projects adopted and implemented Baseline:
Limited capacity for conflict sensitive analysis and dialogue; tension reduction
projects ad hoc and limited in scope and outreach Target: Strengthened national
capacity in  PICs for national stability dialogues, conflict sensitive analyses
and management of appropriate tension reduction measures       $852,000 (RR)
$,690,000 (OR)                             ;          TOTAL $,542,000 []
Indicator: # of national development plans/strategies that specifically address
disaster risk management as  development issue; % increase budget 12 (WUTMI) and
other CSOs allocations for disaster risk management Baseline: National response
plans updated in Vanuatu (2006) and Solomon Islands (1989); not mainstreamed in
national planning process Target: Disaster risk reduction and management
institutionally mainstreamed at least in Vanuatu and Solomon Islands $852,000
(RR) $,690,000 (OR) TOTAL $,542,000 Multi-Country Programme Outcome :
Environment and Sustainable Management Pacific UNDAF Outcome : Sustainable
Environmental Management Strategic Priority Multi-Country Programme Outputs
Output indicators, baselines, targets Partners Indicative Resources Multi-
Country Programme Outcomes  Environmental sustainability mainstreamed into
regional and national policies and planning frameworks Ministry/Department of
Environment, Department of Meteorology and other relevant line ministries and
departments with UN organizations, CROP organizations, ADB, AusAID, EU, Japan
and JICA, Micronesia Conservation Trust (MCT), The Nature Conservancy (TNC), WB,
World Wildlife Fund for Nature (WWF), World Conservation Union (IUCN), CSOs and
community members Ministry/Department of Environment, Department of Meteorology
and other relevant line ministries and departments with UN organizations, CROP
organizations, ADB, AusAID, Canada Fund, EU, Japan and JICA, (MCT), (TNC), WB,
(WWF), (IUCN), Kiribati Association of NGOs (KANGO), other CSOs and community
members  National capacity to develop and implement environmental policies,
legislative and management frameworks developed and mainstreamed through
national policies and budgets (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati,
Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu);
Strengthened capacities for improved access and management of multilateral
environmental agreements (MEAs) (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati,
Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu) []
Indicator: # of national development strategies, policies, plans of PICs
incorporating environmental sustainability issues; % increase in national budget
for environmental sustainability issues Baseline: Limited integration of
environmental concerns in national or sectoral plans and strategies; national
environmental agencies under-resourced and over-extended Target:  PICs with
national development strategies, policies, plans integrating environmental
sustainability issues [] Indicator: # of PICs with strategic environmental
action plans implemented and monitored Baseline: Strategic environmental
strategies and plans not implemented in PICs; national environmental agencies
under- resourced and over-extended Target: Capacity of Environment departments
to support and monitor compliance to environmental legislation; fulfilment of
reporting obligations of MEA-related initiatives       $697,000 (RR)
$16,134,000 (OR)              TOTAL $16,831,000 ;          [] Indicator: Ratio
of area protected to maintain biological diversity (marine and terrestrial) to
surface area; % of pilot initiatives in sustainable livelihoods and
environmental management; # of youth and women generating income through pilot
initiatives; # of pilot initiatives scaled up towards national impact Baseline:
Inadequate capacities of communities to practice responsible and equitable
harvesting of natural resources Target: Strengthen community capacity to
practice responsible and equitable harvesting of natural resources through
traditional knowledge and practices  Sustainable livelihoods of vulnerable
groups, including women and youth, strengthened through institutional support
and leveraging indigenous governance systems, to contribute to sustainable
environmental management (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)  Pacific
communities effectively manage and sustainably use their environment and natural
resources            $650,000 (RR)             $,050,000 (OR) TOTAL $,700,000
$,347,000 (RR) $20,184,000(OR) TOTAL $21,531,000 GRAND TOTAL: $,000,000 (RR)
$44,314,000(OR) TOTAL $52,314,000 13 RRF BY COUNTRY AND RESOURCES Programme
areas Indicative resources Country Amount (thousands of dollars) 156 800 Total
(thousands of dollars) 956 FIJI Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development
Goals Regular Other Good Governance and Human Rights Regular Other Regular Other
Regular Other 162 ,400 50 ,000 60 ,675 ,562 Crisis prevention and recovery ,050
Environment and Sustainable Management ,735 Sub-Total KIRIBATI ,303 ,155 Poverty
Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular Other Regular Other Regular
Other 375 780 465 ,700 80 ,967 Good Governance and Human Rights ,165 ,047
Environment and Sustainable Management Sub-Total MARSHALL ISLANDS ,367 580
Poverty reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular Other Regular Other
Regular Other Regular Other 110 470 74 100  250 50 ,900 Good Governance and
Human Rights 174 Crisis Prevention and Recovery 250 Environment and Sustainable
Management ,950 Sub-Total MICRONESIA ,954 236 Poverty Reduction and Millenium
Development Goals Regular Other Regular Other Regular Other 136 100 100 300
,706 Good Governance and Human Rights 400 Environment and Sustainable Management
,706 Sub-total ,342 NAURU Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals
Regular Other Regular Other Regular Other  230 35 ,300  ,080 230 Good Governance
and Human Rights ,335 Environment and Sustainable Management ,080 Sub-Total
PALAU ,645 Poverty Reducation and Millenium Development Goals Regular  450 14
Country Programme areas Indicative resources Amount (thousands of dollars) 450
350  ,615 Total (thousands of dollars) Other Regular Other Regular Other Good
Governance and Human Rights 350 Environment and Sustainable Management ,615 Sub-
Total SOLOMON ISLANDS ,415 ,816 Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development
Goals Regular Other Regular Other Regular Other Regular Other ,476 ,340 ,302
,520 752 ,240 845 ,106 Good Governance and Human Rights ,822 Crisis Prevention
and Recovery ,992 Environment and Sustainable Management ,951 Sub-total TONGA
15,581 ,451 Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular Other
Regular Other Regular Other Regular Other 201 ,250 128 250  100 60 ,000 Good
Governance and Human Rights 378 Crisis Prevention and Recovery 100 Environment
and Sustainable management ,060 Sub-Total TUVALU ,989 667 Poverty Reduction and
Millenium Development Goals Regular Other Regular Other Regular Other 167 500
264 750 ,120 475 Good Governance and Human Rights ,014 Environment and
Sustainable Management ,595 Sub-total VANUATU ,276 ,875 Poverty Reduction and
Millenium Development Goals Regular Other Regular Other Regular Other Regular
Other 425 ,450 225 400 50 100 212 ,580 Good Governance and Human Rights 625
Crisis Prevention and Recovery 150 Environment and Sustainable management ,792
Sub-Total GRAND TOTAL ,442 52,314 15