A/RES/67/263    United Nations  Distr.: General  20 June 2013  General Assembly
Sixty-seventh session  Agenda item 20    Resolution adopted by the General
Assembly on 17 May 2013  [without reference to a Main Committee (A/67/L.65 and
Add.1)]  67/263.  Reliable and stable transit of energy and its role in
ensuring sustainable development and international  cooperation      The General
Assembly,    Recalling its resolution 63/210 of 19 December 2008,    Recalling
also  the  outcome  document  of  the  United  Nations  Conference  on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”, 1    Bearing in mind the
growing role of the transit of energy in global processes,  Recognizing  the
important  role  of  transportation  hubs  for  the  reliable  and    stable
transit of energy to international markets,  Noting that stable, efficient and
reliable energy transportation, as a key factor    of sustainable development,
is in the interest of the entire international community,  Welcoming  efforts
at  the  national,  bilateral,  subregional,  regional  and  international
levels  in  building  energy  transportation  systems  and  facilitating  the
trade of energy resources to promote sustainable development,    Recognizing
the  importance  of  addressing  the  special  needs  of  landlocked  developing
countries,  inter  alia,  by  establishing  and  promoting  efficient  transit
transportation systems that link them to the international markets, and in this
regard  reaffirming that the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special
Needs of  Landlocked  Developing  Countries  within  a  New  Global  Framework
for  Transit  Transport  Cooperation  for  Landlocked  and  Transit  Developing
Countries 2  constitutes  a  fundamental  framework  for  genuine  partnerships
between  landlocked  and  transit  developing  countries  and  their
development  partners  at  the  national,  bilateral, subregional, regional and
global levels,    _______________  1 Resolution 66/288, annex.   2 Report of the
International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing
Countries and  Donor  Countries  and  International  Financial  and  Development
Institutions  on  Transit  Transport  Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29
August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.   12-49438  *1249438*    Please recycle
Reliable and stable transit of energy and its role in ensuring  sustainable
development and international cooperation A/RES/67/263    Reiterating  the
principles  of  the  Rio  Declaration  on  Environment  and  Development 3  and
of  Agenda 21, 4  and  recalling  the  recommendations  and  conclusions
contained  in  the  Plan  of  Implementation  of  the  World  Summit  on
Sustainable  Development  (Johannesburg  Plan  of  Implementation) 5  concerning
energy for sustainable development,      Noting  the  outcome  of  the  High-
level  Conference  on  Reliable  and  Stable  Transit  of  Energy  and  its
Role  in  Ensuring  Sustainable  Development  and  International Cooperation,
held in Ashgabat on 23 April 2009,  Noting  also  the  launching  of  the
Sustainable  Energy  for  All  initiative  of  the  Secretary-General,  which
focuses  on  access  to  energy,  energy  efficiency  and  renewable  energies,
as well as the decision of the  General  Assembly to declare the  decade
2014–2024 the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All, 6    1.
Recognizes  international  cooperation  for  promoting  the  reliable
transportation  of  energy  to  international  markets  through  pipelines and
other transportation systems;  the  need  for  extensive  2.  Welcomes  the
proposal  of  the  Government  of  Turkmenistan  to  host  an  international
meeting  of  experts  early  in  2014  to  follow  up  on  the  High-level
Conference  on  Reliable  and  Stable  Transit  of  Energy  and  its  Role  in
Ensuring  Sustainable Development and International Cooperation;    Invites  the
Secretary-General  to  seek  the  views  of  Member  States  and  relevant
entities  of  the  United  Nations  system,  including  regional  commissions,
on  issues  relating  to  the  reliable  and  stable  transit  of  energy,  as
well  as  on  possible  modalities  for  international  cooperation,  and  to
communicate  such  views  in  a  summary report of the Secretariat to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session  for further consideration.  3.
82nd plenary meeting  17 May 2013    _______________  3 Report of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992,  vol. I,  Resolutions  Adopted  by  the  Conference  (United  Nations
publication,  Sales  No. E.93.I.8  and  corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.   4
Ibid., annex II.   5 Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September  2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2,
annex.   6 See resolution 67/215.   2/2