A/RES/67/215    United Nations  Distr.: General   20 March 2013  General
Assembly    Sixty-seventh session  Agenda item 20 (i)    Resolution adopted by
the General Assembly on 21 December 2012  [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/67/437/Add.9)]  67/215.  Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy
The General Assembly,      Recalling  its  resolutions  53/7  of  16 October
1998,  54/215  of  22 December  1999 and 55/205 of 20 December 2000, and
recalling also its resolutions 56/200 of  21 December  2001,  58/210  of  23
December  2003,  60/199  of  22 December  2005,  62/197  of  19 December  2007,
64/206  of  21 December  2009  and  66/206  of  22 December  2011  on  the
promotion  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  and  also  its
resolution  65/151  of  20 December  2010  on  the  International  Year  of
Sustainable Energy for All,   Recalling  also  its  resolution  55/2  of  8
September  2000,  by  which  it  adopted  the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, the 2005 World Summit Outcome 1 and  the  outcome  document  of
the  high-level  plenary  meeting  of  the  General  Assembly  on the Millennium
Development Goals, 2     Reaffirming the principles of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development3  and of Agenda 21,4 and recalling the
recommendations and conclusions contained in the Plan  of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of  Implementation) 5
and  the  outcome  document  of  the  United  Nations  Conference  on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,6     Recalling the high-
level  event on Sustainable  Energy  for  All, which was held  at its sixty-
seventh session and which focused on access to energy, energy efficiency  and
renewable energies,    _______________  1 Resolution 60/1.  2 Resolution 65/1.
3 Report  of  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Environment  and
Development,  Rio  de  Janeiro,   3–14 June  1992,  vol. I,  Resolutions
Adopted  by  the  Conference  (United  Nations  publication,  Sales  No.
E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.  4 Ibid., annex II.  5 Report
of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development,  Johannesburg,  South
Africa,   26 August–4 September  2002  (United  Nations  publication,  Sales
No. E.03.II.A.1  and  corrigendum),  chap. I, resolution 2, annex.  6 Resolution
66/288, annex.  12-49150  *1249150*    Please recycle    A/RES/67/215  Promotion
of new and renewable sources of energy    Concerned  that  lack  of  access  to
energy  and  sustainable  modern  energy  services  is  an  important  factor
that  directly  affects  efforts  towards  poverty  eradication,  the  greatest
global  challenge  facing  the  world  today,  and  the  achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals in the developing world,     Deeply  concerned
that  2.6 billion  people  in  developing  countries  rely  on  traditional
biomass  for  cooking  and  heating,  that  1.3 billion  people  are  without
electricity  and  that,  even  when  energy  services  are  available,  millions
of  poor  people are unable to pay for them,     Emphasizing  that  the
increased  use  and  promotion  of  new  and  renewable  sources of energy for
sustainable development could make a significant contribution  towards the
achievement of sustainable development and the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,     Emphasizing
also  the  need  to  take  further  action  to  mobilize  the  provision  of
adequate financial resources of sufficient quality and arriving in a timely
manner, as  well as the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms, to
developing countries  and  countries  with  economies  in  transition  for  the
provision  of  the  efficient  and  wider use of energy sources, in particular
new and renewable sources of energy,     Reaffirming  that  each  country  must
take  primary  responsibility  for  its  own  development and that the role of
national policies and development strategies cannot  be overemphasized in the
achievement of sustainable development, and recognizing  the need for the
creation of an enabling environment at all levels for investment and  sustained
financing,     Noting  with  appreciation  the  work  of  the  International
Renewable  Energy  Agency,  which  is  aimed  at  promoting  the  widespread
and  increased  adoption  and  sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy,
Highlighting  the  importance  of  the  empowerment  of  developing  countries
as    the way to achieve a rapid expansion of renewable energy worldwide,
Stressing the need for a coherent, integrated approach to energy issues and the
promotion  of  synergies  across  the  global  energy  agenda  for  sustainable
development,  with  a  focus  on  eradicating  poverty  and  achieving  the
Millennium  Development Goals,  Takes  note  of  the  reports  of  the
Secretary-General  on  the  International  Year  of  Sustainable  Energy  for
All,  2012, 7  and  on  the  promotion  of  new  and  renewable sources of
energy; 8    1.    2.  Decides to declare 2014–2024 the United Nations Decade of
Sustainable  Energy  for  All,  to  be  promoted  through  all  sources  of
energy,  mindful  of  the  provisions  of  the  annex  to  Economic  and  Social
Council  resolution  1980/67  of  25 July 1980;     Invites  the  Secretary-
General  to  prepare,  in  consultation  with  Member  States  and  other
relevant  stakeholders,  a  report  on  the  United  Nations  Decade  of
Sustainable  Energy  for  All  for  submission  to  the  General  Assembly  at
its  sixty- eighth session;   3.    _______________  7 A/67/314.  8 A/67/318.
2/4  Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy  A/RES/67/215   4.
Stresses  the  need  to  increase  the  share  of  new  and  renewable  sources
of  energy in the global energy mix as an important contribution to achieving
universal  access  to  sustainable  modern  energy  services,  and  recognizes
that  the  activities  of  countries in broader energy-related matters are
prioritized according to their specific  challenges, capacities and
circumstances, including their energy mix;     Emphasizes  that  improving
energy  efficiency,  increasing  the  share  of  renewable  energy,  and
cleaner  and  energy-efficient  technologies  are  important  for  sustainable
development;  5.    Recognizes that the current share of new and renewable
sources of energy  in the global energy supply is still low owing to, among
other factors, high costs and  lack of access to appropriate technologies, and
calls for action to achieve economic  viability  of  new  and  renewable
sources  of  energy  through  enhanced  research  and  development support along
with appropriate policy initiatives and investments at the  national  and
international  levels,  with  Governments  working  in  collaboration  with
relevant stakeholders, including the private sector;  6.    7.  Calls upon
Governments to take further action to mobilize the provision  of  financial
resources,  technology  transfer  on  mutually  agreed  terms,  capacity-
building and  the diffusion  of new and existing environmentally  sound
technologies  to developing countries and countries with economies in
transition, as set out in the  Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;5    8.
Encourages efforts by Governments aimed at creating and developing an  enabling
environment  at  all  levels  to  ensure  the  promotion  and  use  of  new  and
renewable sources of energy;   the  need  Emphasizes  to  reliable,  affordable,
economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally sound energy
services  and  resources  for  sustainable  development,  and  takes  into
consideration  the  diversity  of  situations,  national  policies  and
specific  needs  of  developing  countries  and countries with economies in
transition;   improve  access  to  9.    10.  Reaffirms  its  determination  to
act  to  make  sustainable  energy  for  all  a    reality;  11.  Recognizes the
importance of giving appropriate consideration to energy    issues in the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;  12.  Calls  upon  Governments,
as  well  as  relevant  international  and  regional  organizations  and  other
relevant  stakeholders,  to  combine,  as  appropriate,  the  increased use of
new and renewable energy resources, more efficient use of energy,  greater
reliance  on  advanced  energy  technologies,  including  cleaner  fossil  fuel
technologies,  and  the  sustainable  use  of  traditional  energy  resources,
which  could  meet the growing need for energy services in the longer term to
achieve sustainable  development;     13.  Calls  upon  Member  States  to
galvanize  efforts  to  make  universal  access  to  sustainable  modern  energy
services  a  priority,  as  such  services  contribute  to  poverty
eradication,  improve  the  quality  of  life,  reduce  inequality,  save
lives,  improve  health  and  help  to  provide  for  basic  human  needs,  as
well  as  curb  environmental  risks,  including  those  associated  with
climate  change,  and  stresses  that these services are essential to social
inclusion and gender equality;    14.  Encourages  the  development  of  viable
market-oriented  strategies  that  could result in the most rapid reduction in
the cost of new and renewable sources of  energy  and  increase  the
competitiveness  of  those  technologies,  including  through    3/4
A/RES/67/215  Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy    the  adoption,
as  appropriate,  of  public  policies  for  research,  development  and  market
deployment;   15.  Reiterates its call upon all relevant funding institutions
and bilateral and  multilateral  donors,  as  well  as  regional  funding
institutions  and  non-governmental  organizations,  to  continue  to  support,
as  appropriate,  efforts  aimed  at  the  development  of  the  energy  sector
in  developing  countries  and  countries  with  economies  in  transition  on
the  basis  of  environment-friendly  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy
of  demonstrated  viability,  while  taking  fully  into  account  the
development  structure  of  energy-based  economies  of  developing  countries,
and  to  assist  in  the  attainment  of  the  levels  of  investment  necessary
to  expand  energy  supplies, including beyond urban areas;     16.  Encourages
the Secretary-General to  continue  his  efforts to promote the  mobilization
of  financial  resources,  in  a  stable  and  predictable  manner,  and
technical  assistance,  and  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  and  the  full
utilization  of  existing  international  funds  for  the  effective
implementation  of  national  and  regional high-priority projects in the area
of new and renewable sources of energy;     17.  Requests the Secretary-General
to submit to the General Assembly at its  sixty-ninth  session  a  report  on
the  implementation  of  the  present  resolution,  taking  into  account,
inter  alia,  the  initiatives  taken  by  Member  States  and  international
organizations to create  an  enabling environment  at all levels  for the
promotion  and  use  of  new  and  renewable  energy,  including  measures  to
improve  access  to  such  technologies;     18.  Calls  upon  the  Secretary-
General  to  promote  renewable  energy  and  related sustainable  practices in
all United Nations facilities around  the world,  from  within existing
resources;     19.  Decides  to  include  in  the  provisional  agenda  of  its
sixty-ninth  session,  under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the
sub-item entitled “Promotion  of new and renewable sources of energy”.
61st plenary meeting  21 December 2012    4/4