A/RES/71/233    United Nations  Distr.: General  6 February 2017  General
Assembly    Seventy-first session  Agenda item 19 (i)       Resolution adopted
by the General Assembly on 21 December 2016  [on the report of the Second
Committee (A/71/463/Add.9)]  71/233.  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and  modern energy for all       The General Assembly,    Recalling
its  resolutions  53/7  of  16 October  1998,  54/215  of  22 December  1999,
55/205  of  20 December  2000,  56/200  of  21 December  2001,  58/210  of  23
December  2003,  60/199  of  22 December  2005,  62/197  of  19 December  2007,
64/206 of 21 December 2009, 66/206 of 22 December 2011, 69/225 of 19 December
2014  and  70/201  of  22 December  2015,  as  well  as  its  resolutions
65/151  of  20 December  2010  on  the  International  Year  of  Sustainable
Energy  for  All  and  67/215  of 21 December 2012, in  which it decided to
declare 2014 –2024 the  United  Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All,
Reaffirming  its  resolution  70/1  of  25 September  2015,  entitled
“Transforming  our  world:  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development”,
in  which  it  adopted  a  comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative  Sustainable  Development  Goals  and  targets,
its  commitment  to  working  tirelessly  for  the  full  implementation  of
the  Agenda  by  2030,  its  recognition  that  eradicating  poverty  in  all
its  forms  and  dimensions,  including  extreme  poverty,  is  the  greatest
global  challenge  and  an  indispensable  requirement  for  sustainable
development,  its  commitment  to  achieving  sustainable  development  in  its
three  dimensions  —  economic, social and environmental  — in a balanced and
integrated  manner, and to  building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking  to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming  also  its  resolution  69/313  of  27 July  2015  on  the  Addis
Ababa  for  Action  Agenda  of  Development,  which  is  an  integral  part  of
the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development,  supports  and  complements
it,  helps  to  contextualize  its  means  of  implementation  targets  with
concrete  policies  and  actions,  and  reaffirms  the  strong  political
commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling
environment  at  all  levels  for  sustainable  development  in  the  spirit  of
global  partnership and solidarity,    the  Third  International  Conference  on
Financing  16-22816 (E)  *1622816*      Please recycle  A/RES/71/233  Ensuring
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
Recalling  its  resolution  55/2  of  8 September  2000,  by  which  it  adopted
the  United Nations Millennium Declaration, the 2005  World Summit Outcome 1 and
the  outcome  document  of  the  high-level  plenary  meeting  of  the  General
Assembly  on  the Millennium Development Goals, 2    Reaffirming  the  Rio
Declaration  on  Environment  and  Development 3  and  Agenda 21 4 and  the
principles  set  out  therein,  and  recalling  the  recommendations  and
conclusions  contained  in  the  Plan  of  Implementation  of  the  World
Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  (Johannesburg Plan  of  Implementation) 5
and the  outcome  documents  of the  United  Nations  Conference  on
Sustainable  Development,  entitled  “The  future  we  want”, 6  the  third
International  Conference  on  Small  Island  Developing  States,  entitled
“SIDS  Accelerated  Modalities  of  Action  (SAMOA)  Pathway”,7 and  the  second
United  Nations  Conference  on  Landlocked  Developing  Countries,  entitled
“Vienna  Programme  of  Action  for  Landlocked  Developing  Countries for the
Decade 2014–2024”,8    Welcoming the Paris Agreement9 and its early entry into
force, encouraging all  its  parties  to  fully  implement  the  Agreement,  and
parties  to  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change 10
that  have  not  yet  done  so  to  deposit  their  instruments  of
ratification,  acceptance,  approval  or  accession,  where  appropriate, as
soon as possible,    Welcoming  also  Expo  2017,  to  be  held  in  Astana,  on
the  theme  “Future    energy”,  Reaffirming  that  each  country  must  take
primary  responsibility  for  its  own  development and that the role of
national policies and development strategies cannot  be overemphasized in the
achievement of sustainable development, and recognizing  the  need  for  the
creation  of  an  enabling  environment  at  all  levels  and  across  all
sectors for the achievement of sustainable development,     Emphasizing  that
the  increased  use  and  promotion  of  new  and  renewable  sources of energy
for sustainable development could make a significant co ntribution  towards the
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including  the
Sustainable Development Goals,    Highlighting  the  importance  of  the
empowerment  of  developing  countries  to  achieve  universal  access  through
the  rapid  expansion  of  affordable  sustainable  energy worldwide,
_______________  1 Resolution 60/1.  2 Resolution 65/1.  3  Report  of  the
United  Nations  Conference  on  Environment  and  Development,  Rio  de
Janeiro,  3-14 June  1992,  vol. I,  Resolutions  Adopted  by  the  Conference
(United  Nations  publication,  Sales  No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution
1, annex I.  4 Ibid., annex II.  5  Report  of  the  World  Summit  on
Sustainable  Development,  Johannesburg,  South  Africa,  26 August–4 September
2002  (United  Nations  publication,  Sales  No. E.03.II.A.1  and  corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.  6 Resolution 66/288, annex.  7 Resolution 69/15,
annex.  8 Resolution 69/137, annex II.  9 See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision
1/CP.21, annex.  10 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.  2/7
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
A/RES/71/233    Deeply concerned that 2.7 billion people in developing
countries, especially in  rural  areas,  rely  on  traditional  biomass  for
cooking  and  heating,  while  noting  the  disproportionate health impact and
workload on  women and children, that 1.2 billion  people  are  without  access
to  electricity  and  that,  even  when  energy  services  are  available,
millions of poor people are unable to pay for them,     Recognizing that each
country has primary responsibility for its own econo mic  and  social
development  and  that  this  will  include  the  mobilization  of  financial
resources  as  well  as  capacity-building  and  the  transfer  of
environmentally  sound  technologies to developing countries on favourable
terms, including on concessional  and preferential terms, as mutually agreed,
Welcoming  global  multi-stakeholder  partnerships,  such  as  Sustainable
Energy  for  All,  which  has  given  strong  momentum  to  the  promotion  of
renewable  energy,  and  the  initiatives  of  the  Global  Climate  Action
Agenda,  noting   that  such  partnerships  can  contribute  to  reaching  the
objective  of  ensuring  access  to  affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all,     Noting  with  appreciation  the  work  of  the
International  Renewable  Energy  Agency, which facilitates the widespread and
increased adoption and sustainable use  of all forms of renewable energy,
Stressing the need for a coherent, integrated approach to energy issues and the
promotion  of  synergies  across  for  sustainable  development,  with  a  focus
on  eradicating  poverty  and  achieving  the  Sustainable  Development Goals,
the  global  energy  agenda  Stressing  also  the  importance  of  inclusiveness
within  the  United  Nations  development  system  and  that  no  one  is  left
behind  and  no  country  is  left  behind  in  the implementation of the
present resolution,    1.  Takes  note  of  the  report  of  the  Secretary-
General  on  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All, 11
calls  for  the  rapid  implementation  of  the  strategic  objectives  as
defined  in  the  global  plan  of  action  for  the  Decade ,  as  described in
a previous report of the Secretary-General on the topic,12 and also takes  note
of the report of the Secretary-General on the promotion of new and renewable
sources of energy;13    2.  Also  takes  note  of  the  International  Renewable
Energy  Agency  work  programme  and  budget  for  2016–2017,  and  encourages
the  Agency  to  continue  to  support its members in the achievement of their
renewable energy objectives;     3.  Emphasizes  that  universal  access  to
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern energy for all is an integral
part of poverty eradication and the achievement  of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development; 14    4.  Also  emphasizes  the  need  to  improve
access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all
and  environmentally  sound  energy  services  and  resources  for  sustainable
development,  and  takes  into  consideration  the  diversity  of  situations,
national  policies  and  specific  needs  of  developing  countries  and
countries with economies in transition;    _______________  11 A/71/320.  12 See
A/69/395, sect. III.  13 A/71/220.  14 Resolution 70/1.  3/7  A/RES/71/233
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
5.  Stresses  the  need  to  increase  the  share  of  new  and  renewable
sources  of  energy  in  the  global  energy  mix,  as  well  as  the  rate  of
improvement  in  energy  efficiency, as an important contribution to achieving
universal access to sustainable  modern  energy  services,  and  recognizes
that  the  activities  of  countries  in  broader  energy-related  matters  are
prioritized  according  to  their  specific  challenges,  capacities and
circumstances, including their energy mix and energy systems;     6.  Emphasizes
that  improving  energy  efficiency,  increasing  the  share  of  renewable
energy  and  promoting  cleaner  and  energy-efficient  technologies  are
important  for  sustainable  development,  and  also  emphasizes  the
importance  of  promoting  energy  conservation,  developing  energy-saving
technologies  and  products  and  establishing  effective  mechanisms  to
improve  the  efficient  use  of  energy-related resources;    7.  Also
emphasizes  the  necessity  of  establishing  a  modern  energy  system  that
is  clean,  low-carbon,  climate-resilient,  safe  and  efficient,  includes
renewable  energy  sources,  as  appropriate,  and  delivers  energy  in  line
with  needs  so  as  to  promote affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for all;     8.  Underscores  the  importance  of  access  to  cleaner
and  more  efficient  cooking and heating methods, welcomes ongoing efforts, and
in this regard calls for  the promotion of an enabling environment at the
national and international levels for  the  promotion  of  the  usage  of
sustainable,  cleaner  and  more  efficient  cooking  and  heating methods, in
all countries, in particular developing countries;    9.  Emphasizes  the
potential  of  sustainable  energy  use  to  contribute  to  climate change
mitigation and adaptation, recognizes that increasing the deployment  of
renewable  energy  is  a  component  of  many  countries’  nationall y
determined  contributions  under  the  Paris  Agreement  adopted  under  the
United  Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change, 9 and urges effective
and timely support  for the full implementation of those contributions, as
applicable;     10.  Notes that the  impacts of climate  change can also
threaten access to and  the  supply  of  energy,  and  also  notes  the
importance  of  increasing  the  resilience  of  the  energy  sector  to
climate  change,  in  particular  regarding  sources  of  renewable  energy such
as hydropower, among others;    11.  Welcomes  the  significant  cost
reductions  associated  with  renewable  energy,  and  emphasizes  that  large-
scale  deployment  of  technologies  has  been  uneven and that support is
required to realize the technologies’ potential, along with  appropriate  policy
initiatives  and  investments  at  the  national  and  international  levels,
with  Governments  working  in  collaboration  with  relevant  stakeholders,
including the private sector;    12.  Invites  all  relevant  funding
institutions  and  bilateral  and  multilateral  the  private  sector  and
donors,  as  well  as  non-governmental organizations, to continue ongoing
efforts and take further  action  to  provide  financial  resources,  as
appropriate,  to  support  efforts  aimed  at  the  development  of  the  energy
sector  in  developing  countries  and  countries  with  economies  in
transition  on  the  basis  of  environment-friendly,  low-carbon  and  climate-
resilient  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  of  demonstrated
viability,  noting  the  potential  catalytic  effect  of  concessional  and
other  finance  and  taking  fully  into  account  the  development  structure
of  energy-based  economies  of  developing  countries,  and  to  assist  in
the  attainment  of  the  levels  of  investment  necessary  to  expand
renewable  energy  deployment  and  development,  including  beyond urban areas;
funding  regional  institutions,  4/7  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all  A/RES/71/233    13.  Encourages the
development, dissemination and diffusion and transfer of  environmentally  sound
technologies  to  developing  countries  on  favourable  terms,  including on
concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed, and highlights  the
importance  of  integrating  sustainable  energy  in  the  Technology
Facilitation  Mechanism;    14.  Stresses  the  importance  of  strategies  and
contributions  by  all  relevant  stakeholders  to  multi-stakeholder
partnerships  in  ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and
modern  energy  for  all,  and  encourages  coordination  and  collaboration
between  relevant  multi-stakeholder  partnerships, such as Sustainable Energy
for All;    the  United  Nations  and  15.  Recognizes  the  catalytic  effect
of  capacity-building  and  technical  assistance  on  sustainable  energy
deployment,  and  encourages  existing  and  new  efforts  to  enable
Governments  from  developing countries  and relevant  stakeholders  to  plan,
finance,  implement  and  monitor  sustainable  energy  projects  to  further
strengthen their national institutions and capacities;    16.  Encourages
efforts by Governments aimed at creating and developing an  enabling environment
at all levels to ensure the promotion of energy efficiency and  the use of new
and renewable sources of energy;     17.  Also  encourages  the  development  of
viable  market-oriented  strategies  that could result in further rapid
reductions in the cost of new and renewable sources  of  energy  and  could
further  increase  the  competitiveness  of  those  technologies,  including
through  the  adoption,  as  appropriate,  of  public  policies  for  research,
development  and  market  deployment,  including  rationalizing  inefficient
fossil   fuel  subsidies  that  encourage  wasteful  consumption  by  removing
market  distortions,  in  accordance with national circumstances;    18.
Recognizes  that  sustainable  energy  access  and  deployment  can  both
improve  and  be  accelerated  by  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment,
and  calls  upon  Governments,  the  United  Nations  development  system  and
other  stakeholders  to  increase  educational  and  capacity-building
programmes  for  women  in  the  sector,  to  promote  women’s  full,  equal
and  effective  participation  and  leadership in the design and implementation
of energy policies and programmes, to  mainstream  a  gender  perspective  in
such  policies  and  program mes  and  to  ensure  women’s full and equal access
to and use of new, renewable and sustainable energy  to enhance their economic
empowerment, including employment and other income - generating opportunities;
19.  Calls  upon  Governments,  as  well  as  relevant  international  and
regional  organizations  and  other  relevant  stakeholders,  to  combine,  as
appropriate,  the  increased use of new and renewable energy resources, more
efficient use of energy,  greater  reliance  on  advanced  energy  technologies,
including  cleaner  fos sil  fuel  technologies, and the sustainable use of
traditional energy resources;     20.  Calls  for ensuring  access  to
affordable, reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all,  as  such
services  are  an  integral  part  of  poverty  eradication,  human  dignity,
quality  of  life,  economic  opportunity,  the  combating  of  inequality,  the
promotion  of  health  and  the  prevention  of  morbidity  and  mortality,
access  to  education, clean drinking water and sanitation, food security,
disaster risk reduction  and  resilience,  climate  change  mitigation  and
adaptation,  environmental  impact  reduction,  social  inclusion  and  gender
equality,  including  for  persons  affected  by  humanitarian crises;    5/7
A/RES/71/233  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for all    21.  Welcomes  the  expansion  of  renewable  energy  capacity
additions,  which  are now greater than those of other energy power sources, as
well as the net positive  job contribution of renewables;    22.  Recognizes
the  importance  of  expanding  the  use  of  renewable  energy  beyond  the
power  sector,  encourages  further  efforts  to  promote  renewable  energy
use  in  industry,  construction  and  infrastructure  and  in  particular  in
the  transport  sector,  in  the  context  of  sustainable  development,
including  climate  change,  and  calls  for  greater  efforts  and  attention
to  those  sectors,  including  through  policy  initiatives  and  investments
at  the  national  and  international  levels  in  order  to  scale  up  new
and  renewable  energy  technologies  and  low-carbon  technologies  that  can
reduce negative environmental impacts, especially in the near term;     23.
Also  recognizes  that  current  global  progress  in  improving  energy
efficiency  falls  well  below  the  pace  necessary  to  double  the  global
rate  of  improvement in energy efficiency by 2030;    24.  Encourages  the
adoption  of  building  performance  codes  and  standards,  the  uptake  of
renewable  energy,  energy  efficiency  labelling,  the  retrofitting  of
existing  buildings  and  public  procurement  policies  on  energy,  among
other  modalities as appropriate, as well as the prioritization of smart grid
systems, district  energy  systems  and  community  energy  plans  to  i mprove
synergies  between  renewable energy and energy efficiency;    25.  Calls  for
national  efforts  to  promote  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable
and  modern  energy  for  all,  and  reaffirms  its  commitment  to  support
subnational  and  local  efforts,  taking  advantage  of  their  direct
control,  where  applicable, of local infrastructure and codes to foster uptake
in end -use sectors, such  as  residential,  commercial  and  industrial
buildings,  industry,  transport,  waste  and  sanitation;    26.  Encourages
Governments,  international  organizations  and  other  relevant  stakeholders
to  use  and  promote  an  integrated  resource  planning  and  management
approach in their energy strategies, which considers energy choices in the
context of  linked  sectors,  inter  alia,  water,  air  quality  and  food,
taking  into  account  national  circumstances;    27.  Encourages  the
Secretary-General  to  continue  efforts  to  promote  the  mobilization  of
stable  and  predictable  financial  resources  and  technical  assistance  for
sustainable  energy  and  to  enhance  the  effectiveness,  coordination  and
full  utilization  of  appropriate  international  funds  for  the  effective
implementation  of  national  and  regional  high-priority  projects  for
ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable, sustainable and  modern energy for
all, and requests the Secretary-General,  within existing resources, to make
concrete proposals on the strengthening, through  existing arrangements, of both
inter-agency and intergovernmental coordination, and  institutional  support  on
energy  issues,  and  to  give  appropri ate  consideration  to  progress  on
sustainable  energy  in  the  context  of  the  2030  Agenda  in  his  report
on  the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its
seventy - second session;    28.  Calls  upon  the  relevant  organizations  of
the  United  Nations  system,  within  their respective  mandates  and
resources, to  ensure that  no  one  is  left  behind  and no country is left
behind in the implementation of the present resolution;     29.  Requests  the
Secretary-General  to  prepare,  in  consultation  with  Member  States and
other relevant stakeholders, a report on the activities carried out to  mark
the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  and  related
activities    6/7  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all  A/RES/71/233    within  the  United  Nations  system  for
submission  to  the  General  Assembly  at  its  seventy-second session;  30.
Calls  upon  the  Secretary-General  to  promote  renewable  energy,  energy
efficiency  and  related  sustainable  practices  in  all  United  Nations
facilities  around  the world;    31.  Requests the  Secretary-General  to
submit  to the  General  Assembly  at  its  seventy-second session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and  decides to include in the
provisional agenda of its seventy-second session, under the  item  entitled
“Sustainable  development”,  a  sub-item  entitled  “Ensuring  access  to
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all”,  unless
otherwise  agreed.      66th plenary meeting  21 December 2016    7/7