A/RES/75/211  United Nations  General Assembly        Distr.: General  29
December 2020           Seventy-fifth session  Agenda item 19  Sustainable
development                             Resolution adopted by the General
Assembly    on 21 December 2020      [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/75/457, para. 20)]            75/211.  Entrepreneurship for sustainable
development      The General Assembly,    Recalling its resolutions 67/202 of 21
December 2012, 69/210 of 19 December    2014, 71/221 of 21 December 2016 and
73/225 of 20 December 2018,  Reaffirming  its  resolution  70/1  of  25
September  2015,  entitled  “Transforming  our  world:  the  2030 Agenda  for
Sustainable  Development”,  in  which  it  adopted  a  comprehensive, far-
reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative  Sustainable
Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for  the
full  implementation  of  the  Agenda  by  2030,  its  recognition  that
eradicatin g  poverty  in  all  its  forms  and  dimensions,  including  extreme
poverty,  is  the  greatest  global  challenge  and  an indispensable
requirement for  sustainable  development,  its  commitment  to  achieving
sustainable  development  in  its  three  dimensions  –  economic,  social  and
environmental  –  in  a  balanced  and  integrated  manner,  and  to  building
upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seeking  to
address their unfinished business,    Reaffirming  also  its  resolution  70/299
of  29  July  2016  on  the  follow-up  and    review of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development at the global level,   Reiterating  the  pledge  that
no  one  will  be  left  behind,  reaffirming  the  recognition that the dignity
of the human person is fundamental and the wish to see  the  Sustainable
Development  Goals  and targets  met for all nations and peoples and  for  all
segments  of  society,  and  recommitting  to  endeavour  to  reach  the
furthest  behind first,    Reaffirming  its  resolution  69/313  of  27  July
2015  on  the Addis Ababa Action  Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development, which  is  an  integral  part  of  the  2030
Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development,  supports  and  complements  it,  helps
to  contextualize  its  means  of  implementation  targets  with  concrete
policies  and  actions,  and  reaffirms  the  strong  political  commitment  to
20-17640 (E)    060121  *2017640*      A/RES/75/211  Entrepreneurship for
sustainable development    address the challenge of financing and creating an
enabling environment at all levels  for sustainable development in the spirit of
global partnership and solidarity,   Welcoming the Paris Agreement1 and its
early entry into force, encouraging all  its  parties  to  fully  implement  the
Agreement,  and  parties  to  the  United  Nations  Framework Convention on
Climate Change2 that have not yet done so to deposit their  instruments of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as  soon as
possible,    Recalling the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk  Reduction 2015–2030,3 and reaffirming that the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, among  other  things,  seeks  to  develop  and  implement  holistic
disaster  risk  reduction  management at all levels in line with the Sendai
Framework,     Recalling  also  relevant  strategies  and  programmes  of
action,  including  the  Istanbul Declaration and Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries for  the  Decade  2011–2020,4  the  SIDS  Accelerated
Modalities  of  Action  (SAMOA)  Pathway,5 the Vienna Declaration and Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked  Developing Countries for the Decade
2014–2024,6 taking note of Agenda 2063 of the  African Union, and recognizing
the importance of addressing the diverse needs and  challenges faced by
countries in special situations, in particular African countries, the  least
developed  countries,  landlocked  developing  countries  and  small  island
developing States, as well as the specific challenges facing middle -income
countries,    Reaffirming the  Beijing  Declaration and  Platform for Action, 7
the  Programme  of Action of the International  Conference on  Population  and
Development 8  and the  outcome documents of their review conferences,
Acknowledging  that  entrepreneurship  and  innovation  are  essential  for
harnessing  the  economic  potential  of  each  nation  and  the  importance  of
supporting  mass  entrepreneurship,  creativity  and  innovation,  which  create
new  momentum  for  economic growth and job creation and expand opportunities
for all, including women  and youth,    Recalling  relevant  agreed  conclusions
and  resolutions  adopted  by  the  Commission on the Status of Women, including
the agreed conclusions adopted at its  sixty-first session, entitled “Women’s
economic empowerment in the changing world  of  work”,9  and  the  agreed
conclusions  adopted  at  its  sixty-second  session,  entitled  “Challenges and
opportunities in achieving gender equality and the empowerment of  rural women
and girls”,10 stressing that women and girls, particularly in developing
countries,  are  important  drivers  of  entrepreneurship  and  sustainable
development,  calling  for  measures  to  enable  women  to  leverage  science
and  technology  for  entrepreneurship  and  economic  empowerment,  and
recognizing  the  impo rtance  of    __________________  1  Adopted under the
UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.  2  United Nations, Treaty
Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.  3  Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.  4
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
Istanbul,          Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chaps. I and II.  5
Resolution 69/15, annex.  6  Resolution 69/137, annexes I and II.  7  Report of
the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4 –15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and
II.   8  Report of the International Conference on Population and Development,
Cairo, 5 –13 September    1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.   9  See Official Records of the
Economic and Social Council, 2017, Supplement  No. 7 (E/2017/27),    chap. I,
sect. A.  10  Ibid., 2018, Supplement No. 7 (E/2018/27), chap. I, sect. A.
20-17640  2/9    Entrepreneurship for sustainable development  A/RES/75/211
policies  and  programmes  that  eliminate  discrimination  against  women  and
provide  public infrastructure to ensure equal access for women and men
entrepreneurs,   Recognizing that  multi-stakeholder  partnerships  and  the
resources,  knowledge  and ingenuity of the private sector, civil society, the
scientific community, academia,  philanthropy  and  foundations,  parliaments,
local  authorities,  volunteers  and  other  stakeholders will be important in
order to mobilize and access knowledge, expertise,  technology  and  financial
resources,  complement  the  efforts  of  Governments  and  contribute to the
implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations conferences  and  summits,
as  well  as  support  the  achievement  of  the  Sustainable  Development
Goals in all countries, including developing countries,    Underlining the need
to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for achieving  sustainable
development and to build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions  at
all  levels,  and  reaffirming  that  good  governance,  the  rule  of  law,
human  rights,  fundamental freedoms, equal access to fair justice systems and
measures to combat  corruption and curb illicit financial flows will be integral
to those efforts,     Emphasizing  the  pivotal  role  of  entrepreneurship  in
achieving  sustain able  development in its three dimensions, and emphasizing
that achieving the Sustainable  Development Goals requires the talents,
creativity and entrepreneurial vigour of the  entire population,    Welcoming
the  United  Nations  Youth  Strategy,  launched  by  the  Secretary-   General,
Noting  with  great  concern  the  threat  to  human  health,  safety  and
well-being  caused  by  the  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19)  pandemic,  as
well  as  the  severe  disruption  to  societies  and  economies  and  the
devastating  impact  on  lives  and  livelihoods,  and  that  the  poorest  and
most  vulnerable  are  the  hardest  hit  by  the  pandemic,  reaffirming  the
ambition  to get  back  on track  to achieve the  Sustainable  Development
Goals  by  designing  sustainable  and  inclusive  recovery  strategies  to
accelerate progress towards the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda and to
help  to  reduce  the  risk  of  future  shocks,  and  recognizing  that  the
COVID -19  pandemic  requires  a  global  response  based  on  unity,
solidarity  and  renewed  multilateral  cooperation,    the  Recognizing
important  contribution  to  sustainable  development  by  creating  jobs,
driving  inclusive  economic  growth  and  innovation,  improving  social
conditions  and  addressing  economic,  social  and  environmental  challenges
in  the  context  of  the  2 030 Agenda,  and  emphasizing  that  the role of
entrepreneurship, including social entrepreneurship, and micro -, small and
medium-sized enterprises in social and economic development is more critical
than  ever in the post-COVID-19 recovery and beyond,  that  entrepreneurship
makes    Recognizing  also  that  entrepreneurship  drives  economic  growth  by
creating    jobs, promoting decent work and sustainable agriculture and
fostering innovation,   Recognizing  further  that  entrepreneurship  can  help
to  address  environmental  challenges through the introduction of new climate
change mitigation and adaptation  technologies  and  resilience  measures,  as
well  as  by  promoting  environmentally  sustainable practices and consumption
patterns,    Recognizing  the  positive  contribution  that  entrepreneurship
can  make  in  promoting social cohesion, reducing inequalities and expanding
opportunities for all,  including  women,  young  people,  persons  with
disabilities  and  the  most  vulnerable  people, and reaching the furthest
behind first,    Noting the role that entrepreneurship can play in supporting
participation in the  labour  market  for  persons  with  disabilities,  and
that  promoting  the  feasibility  of    20-17640  3/9    A/RES/75/211
Entrepreneurship for sustainable development    for  persons  with  disabilities
will  increase  awareness  of  entrepreneurship  entrepreneurship  as  a
potential  labour  market  activity,  not   only  for  persons  with
disabilities,  but  also  for  self-employment  and  micro-,  small  and
medium-sized  enterprises,  and  noting  also  that  persons  with
disabilities,  including  women  with  disabilities, face disproportionate and
intersecting forms of discriminat ion, including  in access to financial
resources,  Recalling its resolution 71/279 of 6 April 2017 on Micro-, Small and
Medium-   sized Enterprises Day,  Recognizing the importance of encouraging the
formalization, participation and  growth of micro-, small and medium-sized
enterprises in international, regional and  national markets, including through
access for all to capacity -building and financial  services, such as affordable
microfinance and credit,     Remaining deeply concerned by continued high rates
of youth unemployment,  particularly  in  developing  countries,  which  stifle
the  transformative  potential  of  young people in sustainable development,
Reaffirming  its  commitment  to  substantially  increase  the  number  of
young  people  and  all  adults  who  have  relevant  skills,  including
technical  and  vocational  skills,  for  employment,  decent  jobs  and
entrepreneurship,  and  acknowledging  the  importance  of  strengthening
education  systems,  including  vocational  training,  in  order to develop
relevant skills and competences,    Acknowledging that social entrepreneurship
plays an important role in achieving  the  sustainable  development  challenges
by  applying  innovative  market-based  solutions to social and environmental
problems, while being financially sustainable,  and providing job and income
opportunities for disadvantaged groups,     Acknowledging  also  the  importance
of  promoting  development-oriented  policies  that  support  productive
activities,  job  creation  and  entrepreneurship,  including  social
entrepreneurship,  creativity  and  innovation,  and  encourage  the
formalization  and growth of  micro-,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,
including  through access to financial services and the improvement of financial
literacy, and in  this  regard  recognizing  the  role  of  micro-,  small  and
medium-sized  enterprises  in  promoting  inclusive  and  sustainable
industrialization  that  could  contribute  to  job  creation for all,
Recognizing  that  businesses  will  play  a  central  role  in  the  transition
towards  sustainable development and a more resource-efficient economy,
including concepts  such as the circular economy, by adapting their business
models and value chains,     Noting  with  concern  that  societal  attitudes
and  negative  preconceptions,  in  particular towards women, including the fear
of failure, the lack of opportunity and  insufficient  support  structures,  can
undermine  efforts  to  create  a  culture  of  entrepreneurship,    the
Recognizing  importance  of  quality,  accessible,  timely  and  reliable
disaggregated data for monitoring progress in the implementation of
entrepreneurship  policies and their direct and indirect contribution to the
attainment of the Sustainable  Development  Goals,  and  addressing  sex-
disaggregated  data  gaps,  to  ensure  that  no  one is left behind,    1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;11     2.  Reiterates  the  need
to  promote  sustained,  inclusive  and  sustainable  economic  growth,  full
and  productive  employment  and  decent  work  for  all,  in  that
__________________  11  A/75/257.    20-17640  4/9    Entrepreneurship for
sustainable development  A/RES/75/211    regard  emphasizes the  importance of
improved regulatory  environments and policy  initiatives  that  promote
entrepreneurship,  including  social  entrepreneurship,  and  foster micro-,
small and medium-sized enterprises, and stresses the positive role that
entrepreneurship plays  in driving  job  creation, reducing inequalities  and
expanding  opportunities for all, including for women and youth;  3.  Also
reiterates that the persistently low wages earned by women workers  impact their
economic empowerment, giving rise to the need to build their economic
resilience  by  helping  them  access  and  mobilize  adequate  financial
resources  and  to  promote  women’s  technologies  entrepreneurship and
economic empowerment, and, in addition, to empower women  through
entrepreneurship  by  increasing  their  employment  and  market  opportunities
through  targeted  education  and  training  and  greater  legal  protections
in  the  workplace;    capacity-building  to  undertake  and  4.  Encourages
Governments to take a coordinated and inclusive approach to  promoting
entrepreneurship  involving  all  stakeholders,  while  noting  initiatives  of
civil society, academia and the private sector as important entrepreneurship
drivers,  and to develop policies, taking into account national priorities and
circumstances, that  address  the  legal,  social  and  regulatory  barriers  to
equal,  effective  economic  participation,  and  stresses  the  need  for  a
comprehensive  and  holistic  approach  to  entrepreneurship that includes long-
term and cross-sectoral strategies;    5.  Acknowledges  that  promoting
entrepreneurship  can  stimulate  new  production  processes  and  technology
development,  including  the  building  of  endogenous  capacities  for
enabling  climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptatio n  and  enhancing energy
efficiency, and recognizes that such a policy, which could draw on  the
initiatives presented in the Global Climate Action Agenda, can help Governments
to meet their targets for the Paris Agreement on climate change;     6.  Also
acknowledges that the private sector contributes to the achievement  of
sustainable  development  and  poverty  eradication,  and  that  partnerships
with  the  private  sector  play  an  important  role  in  promoting
entrepreneurship,  generating  employment  and  increasing  revenue  potential,
developing  new  technologies and innovative business models and enabling high,
sustained, inclusive  and equitable economic growth while protecting workers’
rights;    investment,  7.  Further acknowledges the need for Member States to
develop policies and,  where  appropriate,  strengthen  national  and
regulatory  frameworks and their coherence, harnessing the potential of science,
technology and  innovation, closing technology gaps and scaling up capacity-
building at all levels to  better  align  private  sector  incentives  with
public  goals,  including  incentivizing  the  private sector to adopt
sustainable practices, and foster long -term quality investment,  taking  into
account  the  importance  of  responsible  business  practices  and  corporate
social  responsibility,  as  reflected  in  the  10  principles  of  the  United
Nations  Global  Compact and in the Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights: Implementing  the  United  Nations  “Protect,  Respect  and  Remedy”
Framework,12  environmental,  social  and  governance  performance  standards
and  greater  transparency  in  supply  chains to end forced and child labour;
international  policy  8.  Recognizes  the  vital  role  of  entrepreneurship
in  the  development  of  regional economic integration, which can be an
important catalyst for implementi ng  economic reforms, reducing trade barriers
and decreasing trade costs;     9.  Invites  Member  States  to  strengthen  the
capacity  of  national  financial  institutions to reach out to those who have
no access to banking, insurance and other    __________________  12
A/HRC/17/31, annex.    20-17640  5/9    A/RES/75/211  Entrepreneurship for
sustainable development    financial  services,  particularly  women  and
women-led  micro-,  small  and  medium- sized enterprises, green and inclusive
businesses, and digital entrepreneurs, in urban  and especially in rural areas,
including through the use of innovative tools, including  mobile banking,
payment platforms and digitalized payments, and encourages them  to  adopt
regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  that  facilitate  the  safe  and
sound  provision of financial services, increase access to information to
protect consumers  and  promote  financial  literacy,  particularly  for  women,
young  people  and  the  most  vulnerable people;  10.  Also  invites  Member
States  to  support  the  digital  entrepreneurship  of  women,  including  in
e-commerce,  including  for  micro-,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises, to
develop local solutions and relevant content and promote innovation  and decent
job creation;    11.  Encourages  Member  States  to  expand  alternative
sources  of  financing,  including  blended  finance  as  well  as  impact
investing,  cooperatives  and  venture  philanthropy, venture capital and angel
investors for start-ups, and diversify the retail  financial  service  system
to  include  non-traditional  providers  of  financial  services,  such  as
microcredit  and  microfinance,  stresses  the  value  of  a  sound  regulatory
framework in this regard, and encourages the provision of incentives to
microfinance  institutions that meet national standards for delivering sound
financial services to the  poor, with a particular emphasis on women;    12.
Emphasizes  the  important  role  of  national  efforts  aimed  at  bringing
all  workers from the informal to the formal economy and integrating them into
national  social  security  systems,  as  appropriate,  including  by
simplifying  administrative  processes,  such  as  enabling  business
registration  through  single -window  and  e-registration  procedures,  notes
that  recommendation  No.  204  of  the  International  Labour Organization can
provide useful guidance on the transition from the informal  to the formal
economy, and recognizes that women face unique barriers to entering  the formal
workforce;    13.  Invites  Member  States to  strengthen the  capacity  of
women to  transition  from  the  informal  economy  to  formal  employment  and
outline  measures  to  reduce  and  redistribute  women’s  and  girls’
disproportionate  share  of  unpaid  care  and  domestic work and promote decent
paid care and domestic work for women and men  in  the  public  and  private
sectors  by  providing  social  protection,  safe  working  conditions and equal
pay for equal work or work of equal value, thereby facilitating  the transition
of informal workers, including those engaged in informal paid care and  domestic
work, into the formal economy;    14.  Recognizes  that  technological
improvement,  particularly  through  the  diffusion of technology, can provide
new opportunities for businesses to improve their  competitiveness  and
increase  their  productive  capacities,  and  in  this  regard  encourages
Member States to increase cooperation in support of technology exchange  and
transfer on mutually agreed terms, innovation, capacity-building programmes and
the sharing of best practices for promoting entrepreneurship;    15.  Highlights
the importance of supporting technologies that can have a high  social return,
correspond to local needs and contribute to technological upgrading and  social
development;    16.  Recognizes  that  entrepreneurs  can  address  sustainable
development  challenges  by  developing  effective  and  simple  solutions  in
the  areas  of  utility  services,  education,  health  care,  hunger
eradication  and  the  environment,  and  that  social  entrepreneurship,
including  cooperatives  and  social  enterprises,  can  help  to  alleviate
poverty and catalyse social transformation by strengthening the productive
20-17640  6/9    Entrepreneurship for sustainable development  A/RES/75/211
capacities  of  vulnerable  groups,  including  persons  with  disabilities,
and  producing  goods and services that are accessible to them;  17.
Acknowledges  the  value  of  entrepreneurship  education  and  the
dissemination of entrepreneurial thinking across all sectors, encourages all
relevant  actors to increase efforts to systemically integrate entrepreneurship
within the formal  and  informal  education  systems,  including  through,
inter  alia,  skills  development,  career guidance to support entrepreneurship,
behavioural approach programmes such  as  the  Empretec  programme  of  the
United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  and  the  Start  and
Improve  Your  Business  programme  of  the  International  Labour
Organization,  capacity-building,  professional  training  programmes, business
incubators and national centres of excellence, as well as online  platforms  and
e-mentorships,  and  encourages  cooperation  and  networking  and  the  sharing
of  best  practices  while  fostering  innovation  and  using  innovative
teaching  methods  in  line  with  the  demands  of  the  competitive  markets
and  ensuring  the  full  participation of women and girls;    stakeholders,
18.  Encourages  all  in  particular  women  and  young  entrepreneurs,  to
apply  their  creativity  and  innovation  to  solving  sustainable  development
challenges, and emphasizes that local innovation and entrepreneurship  systems
need to be able to fully participate in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for  Sustainable  Development, 13  including  the  Sustainable  Development
Goals,  and  that concerted efforts are needed to ensure the participation of
all;     19.  Reiterates  the  need  for  the  promotion  and  advancement  of
women  in  labour markets, including through policies and programmes aimed at
the elimination  of structural barriers and stereotypes that women of all ages
face in the transition from  school to work, and the need to address challenges
faced by women returning from  care-related career breaks and by older women, by
providing access to technical and  vocational  skills  training,  as  well  as
access to  science, technology,  engineering and  mathematics  job -matching,
and  addressing the multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and
barriers that they  face, including violence, and the unequal distribution of
unpaid care and work, and  promoting their participation in relevant decision-
making processes;    training,  entrepreneurship  development  and  20.
Encourages all relevant stakeholders to further develop financial literacy  and
financial education programmes that include an emphasis on the impact of finance
on sustainable development, as appropriate, in order to ensure that all learners
acquire  the knowledge and skills needed to access financial services, in
particular women and  girls, farmers and those working in micro-, small and
medium-sized enterprises;    21.  Encourages  and  facilitates  women’s
entrepreneurship,  including  by  improving access to financing and investment
opportunities, tools o f trade, business  development  and  training,  in  order
to  increase  trade  and  procurement,  including  public procurement from
women’s enterprises, including micro-, small and medium- sized  enterprises,
cooperatives  and  self-help  groups  in  both  the  public  and  private
sectors;    22.  Strengthens  science  and  technology  education  policies  and
curricula  to  promote  girls  in  science,  technology,  engineering  and
mathematics  so  that  they  are  relevant to the needs of and benefit women and
girls, and encourages investment an d  research  in  sustainable  technology
that  meets  the  needs  of  women,  particularly  in  developing countries, in
order to strengthen their capacities, so as to enable women  to leverage science
and technology for entrepreneurship and economic empowerment  in the changing
world of work;    __________________  13  Resolution 70/1.    20-17640  7/9
A/RES/75/211  Entrepreneurship for sustainable development    23.  Highlights
the  importance  of  developing  and  implementing  policies  and  programmes to
support women’s entrepreneurship, in particular opportunities for new  women
entrepreneurs and those that lead to business expansion for existi ng women-
owned micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, and encourages Governments to
increase  investments  in  women-owned  companies  and  businesses,  to  reduce
administrative barriers in the regulatory environment, removing restrictions
that deter  women from engaging in business activities, and to create a climate
that is conducive  to increasing the number of women entrepreneurs and the size
of their businesses by  providing  them  with  training  and  advisory  services
in  business,  access  to  finance,  administration  and  technology,
facilitating  networking  and  information-sharing  and  increasing  their
participation  on  advisory  boards and in other forums so as to enable them to
contribute to the formulation and  review  of  policies  and  programmes  being
developed,  in  particular  by  financial  institutions;    information  and
communications  24.  Recognizes that social entrepreneurs are agents of change
who can create  alternative sustainable models of production, finance and
consumption to respond to  social,  economic  and  environmental  issues,  while
generating  value  for  their  community  and  stakeholders,  also  recognizes
the  need  to  implement  policies  and  programmes  aimed  at  supporting
social  entrepreneurship,  and  encourages  Governments to set up an environment
conducive to social innovation;    25.  Also  recognizes  that  harnessing
entrepreneurial  talents  among  all  young  people  is  vital  for  increasing
productive  capacities,  developing  new  forms  of  entrepreneurship focused on
information and communications technology, big data,  digitization,  smart
cities  and  creating  start-ups,  and  generating  full  and  productive
employment  and  decent  work  and  inclusive  economic  growth,  and
encourages  Member  States  to  integrate  youth  entrepreneurship  strategies
and  innovative  programmes  into their  national policies,  create  a nurturing
e nvironment for the  full  realization of the rights and capabilities of all
young people, and increase investment  in micro-, small and medium-sized
enterprises, including through impact investment  favouring the poorest and most
vulnerable, entrepreneurial ed ucation, youth capacity- building and information
and communications technology;     26.  Encourages  Governments  and  all
sectors  of  society  to  take  sustainable  measures  to  achieve  full  and
productive  employment  and  decent  work  for  persons  with disabilities, on
an equal basis and without discrimination on the basis of gender  and
disability, including by promoting access to  inclusive  education  systems,
skills  development and vocational and entrepreneurial training, in order to
enable persons  with  disabilities  to  attain  and  maintain  maximum
independence,  notes  that  further  efforts are needed to increase awareness of
the ability of persons with disabilities to  innovate  and  contribute  to  the
achievement  of  sustainable  development  through  entrepreneurship, and in
this regard calls upon all stakeholders to establish research  on  policy
support  for  entrepreneurs  with  disabilities  and  collect  data  in  order
to  develop  or  improve  programmes,  taking  into  account  their
capabilities,  skills,  socioeconomic status and other personal characteristics;
27.  Stresses  the  need  to  highlight  the  value  of  entrepreneurship  and
its  contribution to the 2030 Agenda, including the eradication of poverty in
all its forms  and dimensions, by promoting policies, initiatives and programmes
that supp ort the  development  of  an  enabling  entrepreneurial  ecosystem,
including  by  raising  public  awareness,  reinforcing  local  support
networks  and  employing  specific  measures  aimed at removing negative
preconceptions and negative cultural biases;     28.  Also  stresses  the  need
to  enhance  the  alignment  of  policies  for  entrepreneurship,  including
social  entrepreneurship,  with  the  post -COVID-19  recovery priorities and
the 2030 Agenda, and emphasizes that these policies should    20-17640  8/9
Entrepreneurship for sustainable development  A/RES/75/211    prioritize  those
in  vulnerable  situations,  who  have  the  greatest  needs,  including  women
and  young  entrepreneurs,  and  incentivize  the  economic,  social  and
environmental  dimensions  of  sustainable  development,  adaptation  to
flexible  work  environments, including remote work, digitalization, innovation
t o access alternative  markets and novel financing mechanisms, and the
collection of high -quality, reliable  and  comparable  data,  while  ensuring
an  optimal  regulatory  environment  for  entrepreneurs to start and scale up
their businesses;  29.  Calls upon all stakeholders to implement the present
resolution as a means  to  deliver  the  comprehensive,  far-reaching  and
people-centred  set  of  universal  and  transformative  Goals  and  targets  of
the  2030 Agenda,  in  which  the  dignity  of  the  human person is
fundamental, the Goals and targets are met for all nations and peoples  and for
all segments of society, no one is left behind and we endeavour to reach the
furthest behind first;    30.  Stresses the importance of indicators that can be
used to formulate targeted  entrepreneurship policies and measure their impact
on the Sustainable Development  Goals, and in this regard encourages Member
States, in cooperation with all relevant  stakeholders,  to further identify and
develop  indicators  at the national  and regional  levels, as appropriate;
31.  Recognizes  that  democratic  political  transparent  and  accountable
public  and  private  entities,  effective  anti-corruption  measures  and
responsible  corporate  governance  are  key  conditions  for  making  market
economies  and enterprises more responsive to the values and long-term goals of
society;  institutions,    32.  Calls  upon  the  relevant  organizations  and
bodies  of  the  United  Nations  system  to further recognize and integrate
entrepreneurship in  its  various forms  into  their policies, programmes and
reports, as appropriate, and invites the United Nations  system, and in
particular the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,  to  continue
to  provide  support  to  and  assist  Member  States,  at  their  request,  to
implement  and  assess  coherent  policy  measures  on  identify,
entrepreneurship and the promotion of micro-, small and medium-sized
enterprises;    formulate,  33.  Decides  to  continue  to  consider,  as
appropriate,  the  contribution  of  entrepreneurship to sustainable development
in the follow -up and review framework  of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;    34.  Requests  the  Secretary-General  to  submit to the
General Assembly at its  seventy-seventh  session  a  report  on  the
implementation  of  the  present  resolution,  including COVID-19-related
aspects, effects and responses, and decides to include in  the provisional
agenda of its seventy-seventh session the item entitled  “Sustainable
development”, unless otherwise agreed.      48th plenary meeting  21 December
2020      20-17640  9/9