A/RES/72/224  United Nations  General Assembly        Distr.: General  25
January 2018        Seventy-second session  Agenda item 19 (i)
Resolution adopted by the General Assembly    on 20 December 2017      [on the
report of the Second Committee (A/72/420/Add.9)]            72/224.  Ensuring
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern  energy for all       The
General Assembly,    Recalling its resolutions 53/7 of 16 October 1998, 54/215
of 22 December 1999,  55/205 of 20 December 2000, 56/200 of 21 December 2001,
58/210 of 23 December  2003,  60/199  of  22 December  2005,  62/197  of  19
December  2007,  64/206  of  21 December  2009,  66/206  of  22 December  2011,
69/225  of  19 December  2014,  70/201  of  22 December  2015  and  71/233  of
21 December  2016,  as  well  as  its  resolutions  65/151  of  20 December
2010  on  the  International  Year  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  and
67/215  of  21 December  2012,  in  which  it  decided  to  declare   2014–2024
the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All,      Reaffirming  its
resolution  70/1  of  25 September  2015,  entitled  “Transforming  our  world:
the  2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development”,  in  which  it  adopted  a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative  Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to wor
king tirelessly for  the  full  implementation  of  the  Agenda  by  2030,  its
recognition  that  eradicating  poverty  in  all  its  forms  and  dimensions,
including  extreme  poverty,  is  the  greatest  global  challenge  and  an
indispensable requirement  for  sustainable  develo pment,  its  commitment  to
achieving  sustainable  development  in  its  three  dimensions  —  economic,
social and environmental  — in a balanced and integrated manner, and to
building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seeking
to address their unfinished business,     Reaffirming  also  its  resolution
69/313  of  27 July  2015  on  the  Addis  Ababa  Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development,  which is an integral
part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, supports  and complements
it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with  concrete
policies  and  actions,  and  reaffirms  the  strong  political  commitment  to
address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all
levels  for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and
solidarity,      17-23297 (E)    300118      *1723297*      A/RES/72/224
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
Welcoming the Paris Agreement1 and its early entry into force, encouraging all
its  parties  to  fully  implement  the  Agreement,  and  parties  to  the
United  Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change 2 that have not yet done
so to deposit their  instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession, where appropriate, as  soon as possible,     Recalling  its
resolution  55/2  of  8 September  2000,  by  which  it  adopted  the  United
Nations Millennium Declaration, the 2005 World Summit Outcome 3 and the  outcome
document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals, 4    Reaffirming  the  Rio  Declaration  on
Environment  and  Development 5  and  Agenda 216 and the principles set out
therein, and recalling the recommendations and  conclusions  contained  in  the
Plan  of  Implementation  of  the  World  Summit  on   Sustainable Development
(Johannesburg Plan of Implementation) 7 and the outcome  documents of the
United  Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development,  entitled  “The
future we want”,8 the third International Conference on Small Island Developing
States,  entitled  “SIDS Accelerated  Modalities  of Action  (SAMOA)  Pathway”,9
the  second  United  Nations  Conference  on  Landlocked  Developing  Countries,
entitled  “Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for
the Decade  2014–2024”,10  and  the  Fourth  United  Nations  Conference  on
the  Least  Developed  Countries, entitled “Istanbul Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries  for the Decade 2011–2020”,11    Welcoming the New
Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference  on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador,  from 17 to
20 October 2016,12     Reaffirming  that  each  country  must  take  primary
responsibility  for  its  own  development and that the role of national
policies and development strategies cannot  be overemphasized in the achievement
of sustainable development, and recognizing  the need for the creation of an
enabling environment at all levels and across all sectors  for the achievement
of sustainable development,     Emphasizing  that  universal  access  to
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern energy for all is an integral
part of poverty eradication and the achievement  of  the  2030 Agenda  for
Sustainable  Development,  and  that  the  increased  use  and  promotion  of
new  and  renewable  energy,  including  in  decentralized  systems,  and
energy efficiency could make a significant contribution in that regard,
Deeply concerned that over 3 billion people in developing countries, especially
traditional  biomass  for  cooking  and  heating,  with    in  rural  areas,
rely  on  __________________  1  Adopted under the UNFCCC in
FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.  2  United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.
1771, No. 30822.  3  Resolution 60/1.  4  Resolution 65/1.  5  Report of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,  3−14
June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations
publication,  Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
6  Ibid., annex II.  7  Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Johannesburg, South Africa,  26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and  corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2,
annex.      8  Resolution 66/288, annex.  9  Resolution 69/15, annex.  10
Resolution 69/137, annex II.  11  Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul,          Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.  12  Resolution 71/256, annex.    17-23297  2/7
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
disproportionate  health  and  workload  impacts  on  women  and  children,
that  almost  1.1 billion people are without access to electricity, that Africa
accounts for more than  half of both access figures and that, even when energy
services are available, millions  of poor people are unable to pay for them,
Expressing concern that, at current rates of progress, none of the energy
targets    of the Sustainable Development Goals will be achieved by 2030,
Noting  that  energy  represents  less  than  1 per cent  of  overall  United
Nations    expenditure on the Sustainable Development Goals,   Emphasizing  the
critical  socioeconomic  benefits  of  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable and
modern energy and the need to reframe the understanding of energy  from  a
technical  unit  to  a  requirement  for  basic  social  services,  economic
development and poverty eradication,     Highlighting  the  importance  of  the
empowerment  of  developing  countries  to  achieve universal access through the
rapid expansion of affordable sustainable energy  worldwide,     Recognizing
that each country has primary responsibility for its own economic  and social
development and that this includes the mobilization of financial resources,  as
well as capacity-building and the transfer of environmentally sound technologie
s  to  developing  countries  on  favourable  terms,  including  on
concessional  and  preferential terms, as mutually agreed,     Welcoming  the
significant  reductions  in  the  cost  of  renewable  energy,  the  sector’s
net positive job contributions and the rapid expansion of renewable energy
capacity additions, which are now greater than those of other energy power
sources,  and  noting  that  the  levelized  cost  of  solar  and  wind  energy
in  many  regions  of  the  world is fully competitive with traditional energy
sources,     Taking  note  with  appreciation  of  the  work  of  multi-
stakeholder  partnerships,  including  Sustainable  Energy  for All,  which  has
given  a  strong  momentum  to  the  promotion  of  renewable  energy  and
energy  efficiency,  the  initiatives  of  the  Global  Climate Action Agenda,
the  Small  Island  Developing  States  Lighthouses  Initiative,  SIDS  DOCK
and  others  that  can  contribute  to  reaching  the  objective  of  ensuring
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all,
Noting  with  appreciation  the  work  of  the  International  Renewable  Energy
Agency, which facilitates the widespread and increased adoption and sustainable
use  of all forms of renewable energy,     Stressing the need for a coherent,
integrated approach to energy issues and the  promotion of synergies across the
global energy agenda, with a focus on eradicating  poverty and achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals,      Reiterating  the  pledge  that  no  one
will  be  left  behind,  reaffirming  the  recognition that the dignity of the
human person is fundamental, and the  wish to see  the Goals and targets met for
all nations and peoples and for all segments of society,  and recommitting to
endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,      Recommitting to ensuring that
no country or person is left behind and to focusing  our effort where the
challenges are greatest, including by ensuring the inclusion and  participation
of those who are furthest behind,     1.  Takes  note  of  the  report  of  the
Secretary-General  on  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy
for  All, 13  calls  for  the  rapid  implementation  of  the  strategic
objectives as defined in the global plan of action for the Decade, as described
__________________  13  A/72/156.    17-23297  3/7    A/RES/72/224  Ensuring
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all    in a
previous report of the Secretary-General on the topic,14 and also takes note of
the  report of the Secretary-General on ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable  and modern energy for all; 15  2.  Also  takes  note  of  the  role
and  activities  of  the  International  Renewable  Energy Agency, and
encourages the Agency to continue to support its members in the  achievement of
their renewable energy objectives;     3.  Strongly encourages Governments and
other relevant stakeholders to take  actions  to  achieve  universal  access  to
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy, increase the global
share of new and renewable energy, improve t he inclusion  of  developing
countries  in  energy  sector  cooperation,  where  relevant,  and  increase
the  rate  of  improvement  in  energy  efficiency  for  a  clean,  low-carbon,
climate- resilient,  safe,  efficient,  modern  and  sustainable  energy
system,  given  the  system ic  sustainable  development  benefits,  while
taking  into  consideration  the  diversity  of  national situations,
priorities, policies,  specific  needs  and  challenges  and capacities  of
developing countries, including their energy mix and energy systems;      4.
Calls  for ensuring  access  to affordable, reliable,  sustainable and  modern
energy for all, as such services are an integral part of poverty eradication
measures,  human dignity, quality of life, economic opportunity, the combating
of inequality, the  promotion  of  health  and  the  prevention  of  morbidity
and  mortality,  access  to  education,  safe  drinking  water  and  sanitation,
food  security,  disaster  risk  reduction  and  resilience,  climate  change
mitigation  and  adaptation,  environmental  impact  reduction,  social
inclusion  and  gender  equality,  including  for  persons  affected  by
humanitarian emergencies;     5.  Underscores  the  importance  of  access  to
cleaner  and  more  efficient  cooking and heating methods, welcomes ongoing
efforts, and in this regard calls for  the promotion of an enabling environment
at the national and international levels for  the  increased  usage  of
sustainable,  cleaner  and  more  efficient  cooking  and  heating  methods in
all countries, in particular developing countries;      6.  Encourages
Governments,  the  United  Nations  system  and  relevant  stakeholders to
leverage the cost-competitiveness of renewable energy, especially in  off-grid
areas,  in  order  to  achieve  universal  energy  access,  such  as  by
establishing  policy  frameworks  for  metering  and  payment  systems,
requiring  cost  comparisons  between grid extension and off-grid solutions,
facilitating investment by domestic and  foreign  banks  and  educating
students,  communities,  investors  and entrepreneurs on  renewable energy and
energy efficiency, among other activities,  where  feasible and  appropriate;
7.  Calls  upon  Governments  to  expand  the  use  of  renewable  energy
beyond  the power sector, taking into account national priorities and
constraints, to industry,  heating and cooling, construction and infrastructure
and, in particu lar, the transport  sector,  including  through  sustainable
sector  coupling,  in  the  context  of  sustainable  development, including
climate change, and calls for supportive policy initiatives and  investments at
the national and international levels;      8.  Recognizes  that  current
global  progress  in  improving  energy  efficiency  falls well below the pace
necessary to double the global rate of improvement in energy  efficiency by
2030, and encourages, in accordance with national laws and regulations,  the
adoption  of  building  performance  codes  and  standards,  energy  efficiency
labelling, the promotion of energy  management systems, the retrofitting of
existing  buildings  and  public  procurement  policies  on  energy,  among
other  modalities,  as    __________________  14  See A/69/395, sect. III.  15
A/72/160.      17-23297  4/7    Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all     appropriate, as well as the
prioritization of smart grid systems, district energy systems  and  community
energy  plans  to  improve  synergies  between  renewable  energy  and  energy
efficiency, which aim to promote the interconnectivity of clean and renewable
energy infrastructure and improve energy efficiency;   9.  Calls  upon
Governments,  as  well  as  relevant  international  and  regional
organizations  and  other  relevant  stakeholders,  to  combine,  as
appropriate,  the  increased use of new and renewable energy resources, more
efficient use of energy,  greater  reliance  on  advanced  energy  technologies,
including  cleaner  fossil  fuel  technologies, and the sustainable use of
traditional energy resources;      10.  Encourages  Governments, relevant
international organizations  and other  relevant  stakeholders  to  use  and
promote  an  integrated  resource  planning  and  management approach in their
energy strategies that considers energy choices in the  context  of  linked
sectors,  inter  alia,  water,  waste,  air  quality  and  food,  taking  into
account national circumstances;     11.  Recognizes  that  sustainable  energy
access  and  deployment  can  both  improve and be accelerated by gender
equality and the empowerment of all  women  and girls, and calls upon
Governments, the United Nations development system and  other  stakeholders  to
increase  educational  and  capacity-building  programmes  for  women  in  the
sector,  promote  women’s  full,  equal  and  effective  participation  and
leadership  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  energy  policies  and
programmes,  mainstream  a  gender  perspective  in  such  policies  and
programmes  and  ensure  women’s  full  and  equal  access  to  and  use  of
sustainable  energy  to  enhance  their  economic  empowerment,  including
employment  and  other  income-generating  opportunities;     12.  Emphasizes
the potential of sustainable energy use to contribute to climate  change
mitigation  and  adaptation,  recognizes  that  increasing  the  deployment  of
renewable  energy  is  a  component  of  many  countries’  nationally
determined  contributions  under  the  Paris  Agreement  adopted  under  the
United  Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change, 1 and urges effective
and timely support  for the full implementation of those contributions, as
applicable;      13.  Notes that the impacts of climate change can also threaten
access to and  the supply of energy, and also notes the importance of increasing
the resilience of the  energy sector to climate change, in particular regarding
sources of renewable energy  such as hydropower, among others;     14.
Emphasizes,  while  noting  progress,  that  the  large-scale  deployment  of
technologies has been uneven and that support is required to realize their
potential,  along  with  appropriate  policy  initiatives  and  investments  at
the  national  and  international  levels,  with  Governments  working  in
collaboration  with  relevant  stakeholders, including the private sector;
15.  Also emphasizes the value of regional and interregional approaches, which
can,  among  other  advantages,  enhance  the  deployment  of  renewable  energy
by  facilitating the sharing of experiences, reduce transaction costs, leverage
economies  of  scale,  enable  greater  cross-border  interconnectivity  to
promote  energy  system  reliability and resilience and augment domestic
capacity-building, and recognizes the  work of organizations and initiatives in
that regard;      16.  Invites  all  relevant  funding  institutions  and
bilateral  and  multilateral  the  private  sector  and  donors,  as  well  as
non-governmental organizations, to continue ongoing efforts and take further
action  to  provide  financial  resources,  as  appropriate,  to  support
efforts  aimed  at  ensurin g  access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy in developing countries  and  countries  with  economies  in
transition,  including  low-carbon  and  climate-   regional  institutions,
funding  17-23297  5/7    A/RES/72/224  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all    resilient  new  and renewable sources
of  energy of  demonstrated  viability,  especially  focused on energy access
and economic development in both urban and rural areas,  while noting the
potential catalytic effect of concessional and other finance and taking  fully
into  account  the  development  structure  of  energy-based  economies  of
developing countries;   17.  Encourages  the  development,  dissemination,
diffusion  and  transfer  of  environmentally  sound  technologies  to
developing  countries  on  favourable  terms,  including on concessional and
preferential terms, as mutually agreed, and highlights  the  importance  of
integrating  sustainable  energy  in  the  Technology  Facilitation  Mechanism;
18.  Stresses  the  importance  of  strategies  and  contributions  by
Governments  and  relevant  stakeholders  to  multi-stakeholder  partnerships
in  ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern
energy  for  all,  and  encourages  coordination  and  collaboration  between
relevant  multi-stakeholder partnerships, such as Sustainable Energy for All;
the  United  Nations  and  19.  Recognizes  the  catalytic  effect  of
capacity-building  and  technical  assistance on sustainable energy deployment,
and encourages existing and new efforts  to enable Governments from developing
countries and relevant stakeholders to plan,  finance, implement and monitor
sustainable energy projects to further stren gthen their  national institutions
and capacities;     20.  Encourages  the  development  of  viable  market-
oriented  strategies  that  could result in further rapid reductions in the cost
of new and renewable sources of  energy  and  could  further  increase  the
competitiveness  of  those  technologies,  including  through  the  adoption,
as  appropriate,  of  public  policies  for  research,  development  and  market
deployment,  including  rationalizing  inefficient  fossil  fuel  subsidies
that  encourage  wasteful  consumption  by  removing  mar ket  distortions,  in
accordance with national circumstances;     21.  Also encourages research and
development and the development of viable  market-oriented  strategies  that
could  result  in  further  competitiveness  and  rapid  reductions in the cost
of sustainable energy;     22.  Calls  for  national  efforts  to  promote
access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all
and  strengthened  local  engagement  to  complement  current  approaches,  and
reaffirms  the  commitment  to  supporting  subnational  and  local  efforts,
taking  advantage  of  their  direct  control,  where  applicable, of local
infrastructure and codes to foster uptake in end -use sectors, such  as
residential,  commercial  and  industrial  buildings,  industry,  transport,
waste  and  sanitation;     23.  Encourages  the  Secretary-General  to
continue  efforts  to  promote  the  provision  of  stable,  adequate  and
predictable  financial  resources  and  technical  assistance for sustainable
energy and to enhance the effectiveness, coordination and  full utilization of
appropriate international funds for the effective implementation of  national
and regional high-priority projects for ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all;     24.  Encourages the entities of the
United Nations development system, within  their respective mandates, in the
context of the implementation of resolution  71/243  of 21 December 2016, to
assist countries, upon request by their Governments, taking  into  account  the
need  to  improve  coordination  between  them,  and  explicitly  leveraging
partnerships  with  other  international  organizations,  donors  and  relevant
stakeholders,  including  in  their  efforts  to  achieve  universal  access  to
sustainable  energy and to accelerate its deployment;     17-23297  6/7
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
25.  Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates and resources, to ensure that no one is left behind
and no  country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
26.  Calls  upon  the  Secretary-General  to  promote  renewable  energy,
energy  efficiency  and  related  sustainable  practices  in  all  United
Nations  facilities  and  operations  around  the  world,  set  implementation
targets  and  timelines,  building  on  and avoiding duplication with existing
initiatives, and report on progress, within the  most relevant existing
reporting frameworks;     27.  Requests  the  Secretary-General  to  submit to
the  General Assembly at its  seventy-third  session  a  report  on  the
implementation  of  the  present  resolution,  including  activities  carried
out  to  mark  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy for All,
and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy -third  session,
under  the  item  entitled  “Sustainable  development”,  the  sub-item  entitled
“Ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy
for  all ”,  unless otherwise agreed.       74th plenary meeting   20 December
2017    17-23297  7/7