A/RES/74/225  United Nations  General Assembly        Distr.: General  21
January 2020          Seventy-fourth session  Agenda item 19 (j)  Sustainable
development: ensuring access to affordable,  reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for all                        Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 19 December 2019      [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/74/381/Add.10)]            74/225.  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern  energy for all      The General Assembly,    Recalling
its resolutions 53/7 of 16 October 1998, 54/215 of 22 December 1999,  55/205 of
20 December 2000, 56/200 of 21 December 2001, 58/210 of 23 December  2003,
60/199  of  22  December  2005,  62/197  of  19  December  2007,  64/206  of  21
December  2009,  66/206  of  22  December  2011,  69/225  of  19  December
2014,  70/201 of 22 December 2015, 71/233 of 21 December 2016, 72/224 of 20
December  2017  and  73/236  of  20  December  2018,  as  well  as  its
resolutions  65/151  of  20 December 2010 on the International Year of
Sustainable Energy for All and 67/215  of 21 December 2012, in which it decided
to declare  2014–2024 the United Nations  Decade of Sustainable Energy for All,
Reaffirming  its  resolution  70/1  of  25  September  2015,  entitled
“Transforming  our  world:  the  2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development”,
in  which  it  adopted  a  comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative  Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its
commitment to working tireles sly for  the  full  implementation  of  the
Agenda  by  2030,  its  recognition  that  eradicating  poverty  in  all  its
forms  and  dimensions,  including  extreme  poverty,  is  the  greatest  global
challenge  and  an indispensable requirement  for  sustainable  development,
its  commitment  to  achieving  sustainable  development  in  its  three
dimensions  –  economic,  social  and  environmental  –  in  a  balanced  and
integrated  manner,  and  to  building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking  to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming  also  its  resolution  69/313  of  27  July  2015  on  the  Addis
Ababa  Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development,  which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports  and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of
implementation targets with    19-22494 (E)    240120  *1922494*      Ensuring
access to affordable, reliable,  sustainable and modern energy for all
A/RES/74/225    concrete  policies  and  actions,  and  reaffirms  the  strong
political  commitment  to  address the challenge of financing and creating an
enabling environment at all levels  for sustainable development in the spirit of
global partnersh ip and solidarity,   Reaffirming  further  the  Paris
Agreement 1  and  its  early  entry  into  force,  and  encouraging all its
parties to fully implement the Agreement and parties to the United  Nations
Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change 2  that  have  not  yet  done  so  to
deposit  their  instruments  of  ratification,  acceptance,  approval  or
accession,  where  appropriate, as soon as possible,     Welcoming the 2019
Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General  on  23  September,  and
taking  note  of  the  multi-partner  initiatives  and  commitments  presented
during the Summit,     Highlighting  the  synergies  between  the  2030  Agenda
for  Sustainable    Development and the Paris Agreement,   Expressing concern
that, at current rates of progress, none of the global energy    targets of the
Sustainable Development Goals will be achieved by 2030,    Recalling  its
resolution  55/2  of  8  September  2000,  by  which  it  adopted  the  United
Nations Millennium Declaration, the 2005 World Summit Outcome 3 and the  outcome
document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals, 4    Reaffirming  the  Rio  Declaration  on
Environment  and  Development 5  and  Agenda 216 and the principles set out
therein, and recalling the reco mmendations and  conclusions  contained  in  the
Plan  of  Implementation  of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development
(Johannesburg Plan  of Implementation) 7 and  the outcome  documents of the
United  Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development,  entitled  “The
future we want”,8 the third International Conference on Small Island Developing
States,  entitled  “SIDS Accelerated  Modalities  of Action  (SAMOA)  Pathway”,9
the  second  United  Nations  Conference  on  Landlocked  Developing  Countries,
entitled  “Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for
the Decade  2014–2024”,10 and  the  Fourth  United  Nations  Conference  on  the
Least  Developed  Countries, entitled “Istanbul Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries  for the Decade 2011–2020”,11    Reaffirming  also
the  New  Urban  Agenda,  adopted  at  the  United  Nations  Conference  on
Housing  and  Sustainable  Urban  Development  (Habitat  III),  held  in  Quito
from 17 to 20 October 2016, 12 which underlines, inter alia, the importance of
energy for cities,     __________________  1  Adopted under the UNFCCC in
FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.  2  United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.
1771, No. 30822.  3  Resolution 60/1.  4  Resolution 65/1.  5  Report of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,  3−14
June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations
publication,  Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
6  Ibid., annex II.  7  Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Johannesburg, South Africa,  26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and  corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2,
annex.      8  Resolution 66/288, annex.  9  Resolution 69/15, annex.  10
Resolution 69/137, annex II.  11  Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul,          Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.  12  Resolution 71/256, annex.    19-22494  2/8
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,  sustainable and modern energy for all
A/RES/74/225    Reaffirming  further  that  each  country  must  take  primary
responsibility  for  its  own  development  and  that  the  role  of  national
policies  and  development  strategies  cannot  be  overemphasized  in  the
achievement  of  sustainable  development,  and  recognizing  the  need  for
the  creation  of  an  enabling  environment  at  all  levels  and  across all
sectors for the achievement of sustainable development,      Reaffirming  the
sovereign  rights  of  countries  over  their  energy  resources  and  their
right  to  define  appropriate  policies  for  the  production  and  use  of
energy,  recognizing that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development shall be
implemented  for the full benefit of all, for today’s generation and for future
generations,     Emphasizing  that  universal  access  to  affordable,
reliable,  sustainable  and  modern energy for all is an integral part of
poverty eradication and the achievement  of  the  2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable
Development,  and  that  the  increased  use  and  promotion  of  new  and
renewable  energy,  including  in  off-grid  and  decentralized  systems, and
energy efficiency could make a significant contribution in that regard,
Deeply  concerned  that  nearly  3  billion  people  in  developing  countries,
especially in rural areas, rely on traditional biomass, coal and kerosene for
cooking  and heating, with disproportionate health and workload impacts on
women, children  and people in vulnerable situations, including an estimated 4
million premature deaths  annually,  that,  while  the  global  population
without  access  to  electricity  fell  below  1 billion,  close  to  840
million  people  are  still  without  access  to  electricity,  that
reliability and affordability remain challenges in many countries, even as the
number  of household connections increases, that Africa accounts for  more than
half of both  access  figures  and  that,  even  when  energy  services  are
available,  millions  of  poor  people are unable to pay for them,    Noting
with concern that energy represents less than 1 per cent of overall United
Nations  expenditure  on  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals,  despite  its
critical  importance also in achieving other goals,     Emphasizing  the
critical  socioeconomic  benefits  of  affordable,  reliabl e,  sustainable and
modern energy and the need to reframe the understanding of energy  from a
technical unit to a requirement for basic social services, including health
care,  economic development and poverty eradication,     Highlighting  the
importance  of  the  empowerment  of  developing  countries  to  achieve
universal  access  through  the  rapid  expansion  of  affordable,  reliable,
sustainable and modern energy worldwide,     Highlighting  also  the
significant  efforts  made  in  developing  countries  that  contributed to an
increase in the global electrification rate to 89 per cent in 2017, and
stressing  the  need  to  further  close  the  electrification  gap  in  many
difficult -to-reach  populations, in particular in sub-Saharan Africa,
Recognizing that each country has primary responsibility for its own economic
and  social  development  and  that  this  will  include  the  mobilization  of
financial  resources,  as  well  as  capacity-building  and  the  transfer  of
environmentally  sound  technologies  including  concessional and preferential
terms,     to  developing  countries  on  mutually  agreed  terms,  Welcoming
the increase in the share of renewable energy as a part of total final  energy
consumption  in  2016  at  the  fastest  rate  since  2012  and  the
significant  reductions in the cost of renewable energy, the sector’s net
positive job contributions  and  the  rapid  expansion  of  renewable  energy
capacity  additions,  which  are  now  greater  than  those  of  other
resources  in  the  electricity  sector,  and  noting  that  the  levelized
cost  of  solar  and  wind  energy  in  many  regions  of  the  world  is  fully
competitive with traditional energy resources,     19-22494  3/8    Ensuring
access to affordable, reliable,  sustainable and modern energy for all
A/RES/74/225    Noting  with  appreciation  the  work  of  the  International
Renewable  Energy  Agency, which facilitates the widespread and increased
adoption and sustainable use  of all forms of renewable energy,    Taking note
of the work of multi-stakeholder partnerships, including Sustainable  Energy
for All,  which  has  given  strong  momentum  to  the  promotion  of  renewable
energy and energy efficiency, the initiatives of the Global Climate Action
Agenda, the  Small Island Developing States Lighthouses Initiative, SIDS DOCK,
the International  Partnership  for  Energy  Efficiency  Cooperation  and
others  that  can  contribute  to  reaching  the  objective  of  ensuring
access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern energy for all,
Noting with appreciation that the transformation of the world’s energy systems
is being accelerated by advances in technology, rapid declines in the cost of
renewable  energy,  the  deployment  of  least-cost  decentralized  solutions,
policy  support,  new  business models and the sharing of best practices,
welcoming the establishment of the  International  Solar  Alliance  as  an
international  organization,  and  noting  the  continuing work of the
International Renewable Energy Agency,      Stressing the need for a coherent,
integrated approach to energy issues and the  promotion of synergies across the
global energy agenda, with a focus on eradicating  poverty and achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals,      Reiterating  the  pledge  that  no  one
will  be  left  behind,  reaffirming  the  recognition that the dignity of the
human person is fundamental, and the wish to see  the Goals and targets met for
all nations and peoples and for all segments of society,  and recommitting to
endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,     Noting  that,  in  the
transition  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy for
all, and to achieve universal access by 2030, the substitution of inefficient
fuels  with  liquid  petroleum  gas  or  other  sustainable  household  fuels,
while  recognizing the need to increase the share of renewable energy, could be
appropriate  in  urban  areas  to  significantly  reduce  negative  health
impacts  if  used  as  a  cooking  source,  and  contribute  to  decreased
greenhouse  gas  emissions  and  to  achieving  the  goals of the Paris
Agreement,     1.  Takes  note  of  the  report  of  the  Secretary-General  on
ensuring  access  to    affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for
all; 13   2.  Also  takes  note  of  the  role  and  activities  of  the
International  Renewable  Energy Agency,  encouraging  the Agency  to  continue
to  support  its  members  in  the  achievement of their renewable energy
objectives, as well as the contributions of the  International  Solar Alliance,
and  encouraging  its  work  to  collectively  address  key  common challenges
to the scaling-up of solar energy, as well as the contributions of  other
international and regional organizations and forums to the global energy agenda;
3.  Welcomes the significant progress recorded with regard to several targets
of Sustainable Development Goal 7; 14   4.  Strongly encourages Governments and
other relevant stakeholders to take  actions  to  achieve  universal  access  to
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy, increase the global
share of new and renewable energy, improve the inclusion  of  developing
countries  in  energy  sector  cooperation,  where  relevant,  and  increase
the rate of improvement in energy efficiency for a clean, low -emission, low-
carbon  climate-resilient,  safe,  efficient,  modern,  affordable  and
sustainable  energy  system,  given the systemic sustainable development
benefits, while taking into consideration    __________________  13  A/74/265.
14  See resolution 70/1.      19-22494  4/8    Ensuring access to affordable,
reliable,  sustainable and modern energy for all  A/RES/74/225    the diversity
of national situations, priorities, policies, specific needs and challenges  and
capacities of developing countries, including their energy mix and energy
systems;   5.  Calls  for ensuring  access  to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and  modern  energy for all, as such services are an integral part
of poverty eradication measures,  human dignity, quality of life, economic
opportunity, the combating of inequality, the  promotion  of  health  and  the
prevention  of  morbidity  and  mortality,  access  to  education,  safe
drinking  water  and  sanitation,  food  security,  disaster  risk  reduction
and  resilience,  climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation,  environmental
impact  reduction,  social  inclusion  and  gender  equality,  including  for
persons  affected  by  humanitarian emergencies;     6.  Underscores  the
importance  of  access  to  cleaner  and  more  efficient  and  sustainable
cooking  and  heating  methods,  welcomes  ongoing  efforts,  and  in  this
regard  calls  for  the  promotion  of  an  enabling  environment  at  the
national  and  international levels for the increased usage of sustainable,
cleaner and more efficient  cooking and heating methods in all countries, in
particular developing countries;      7.  Encourages  Governments,  the  United
Nations  system  and  relevant  stakeholders to leverage the cost-
competitiveness of renewable energy, especially in  off-grid  areas,  in  order
to  achieve  universal  energy  access,  such  as  by  establishing  policy
frameworks  for  metering  and  payment  systems,  requiring  cost  comparisons
between grid extension and off-grid solutions, facilitating investment by
domestic and  foreign  banks  and  educating  students,  communities,  investors
and entrepreneurs on  renewable energy, energy efficiency and conservation,
among other activities, where  feasible and appropriate;     8.  Recognizes the
key role that natural gas currently plays in many countries  and its potential
to expand significantly over the coming decades to meet demand in  some
countries as well as in new sectors, such as the transportation sector,
supporting  transitions  towards lower-emission  energy  systems, and  calls
upon  Governments to  enhance energy security through the sharing of best
practices and knowledge for the  security of gas supply and demand;     9.
Supports  energy  access  in  accordance  with  the  national  needs  of
developing  countries,  in  particular  the  least  developed  countries  and
small  island  developing States, to tackle their energy access challenges by
identifying the specific  needs of each  country  by  mobilizing  technical  and
financial  assistance  and tools to  deploy  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable
and  modern  energy  solutions  to  tackle  the  energy access deficit;     10.
Calls  upon  Governments  to  expand  the  use  of  renewable  energy  beyond
the power sector, taking into account national priorities and constraints, to
industry,  heating and cooling, construction and infrastructure and, in
particular, the transport  sector,  including  through  sustainable  sector
coupling  and  sustainable  and  modern  bioenergy, in the context of
sustainable development, including climate change, and  calls for supportive
policy initiatives and investments at the national and international  levels;
11.  Recognizes  that  current  global  progress  in  improving  energy
efficiency  falls well below the pace necessary to double the global rate of
improvement in energy  efficiency by 2030, and encourages, in accordance with
national laws and regulations,  the promotion of widespread energy efficiency
initiatives in all economic sectors, the  adoption  and  updating  of  building
performance  codes  and  standards,  energy  efficiency labelling, the promotion
of energy management systems, the retrofitting of  existing buildings and public
procurement policies on energy, among other modalities,   as  appropriate,  as
well  as  the  prioritization  of  smart  grid  systems,  district  energy
systems and community energy plans to improve synergies among clean and
effective    19-22494  5/8    Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all  A/RES/74/225    use  of  traditional
resources,  renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency,  which  aim  to  promote
the  interconnectivity  of  clean  and  renewable  energy  infrastructure  and
improve energy efficiency;   12.  Calls  for  strengthened  cooperation  at  the
regional  level  to  promote  innovation  and  facilitate  financing,  support
regional  cross -border  power  grid  connectivity,  as  appropriate,  to
advance  economic  integration  and  sustainable  development and share best
practices that are responsive to regional needs with regard  to Sustainable
Development Goal 7 and its interlinkages  with the other Sustainable
Development  Goals,  and  in  this  regard  encourages  Governments  to
reinforce  their  energy  interconnections,  connecting regional  energy
markets  and  increasing  energy  security at the global level;     13.  Calls
upon  Governments,  as  well  as  relevant  international  and  regional
organizations  and  other  relevant  stakeholders,  to  combine,  as
appropriate,  the  increased use of new and renewable energy resources, more
efficient use of energy,  greater  reliance  on  advanced  energy  technologies,
including  cleaner  fossil  fuel  technologies, and the sustainable use of
traditional energy resources;     14.  Encourages Governments, relevant
international and regional organizations   and  other  relevant  stakeholders
to  promote  investments  in  developing  sustainable,  reliable,  modern,
inclusive  and  equitable  energy  systems,  including,  inter  alia,  by
strengthening energy systems through cross-border grid connections, as
appropriate,  and  to  consider  incorporating  decentralized  renewable  energy
solutions  in  energy  planning,  as  appropriate,  and  recognizes  that
energy  transition  wil l  take  different  paths in different parts of the
world;     15.  Also  encourages  Governments,  relevant  international
organizations  and  other relevant  stakeholders  to  use and  promote an
integrated resource  planning  and  management approach in their energy
strategies that considers energy choices in the  context  of  linked  sectors,
inter  alia,  water,  waste,  air  quality  and  food,  taking  into  account
national circumstances;    16.  Recognizes that sustainable energy access and
its deployment can be both  improved and accelerated by gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and  girls, and calls upon Governments, the United
Nations development system and other  stakeholders to increase educational and
capacity-building programmes for women in  the  sector,  further  advance  equal
pay  and  leadership  and  other  opportunities  for  women in the energy
sector, promote women’s full, equal and effective participation  and leadership
in the design and implementation of energy policies and programmes,  mainstream
a  gender  perspective  in  such  policies  and  programmes  and  ensure
women’s  full  and  equal  access  to  and  use  of  sustainable  energy  to
enhance  their  economic  and  social  empowerment,  including  employment  and
other  income - generating opportunities;     17.  Encourages  Governments,
with  the  support  of  relevant  stakeholders,  as  appropriate, to accelerate
the transition towards sustainable economies, according to  national policies
and plans, through mitigation and adaptation strategies that improve  energy
efficiency  and  create  more  and  better  employment  opportunities  for  all,
including young people, in wage and self-employment;     18.  Emphasizes the
potential of sustainable energy use to contribute to climate  change  mitigation
and  adaptation,  recognizes  that  increasing  the  deployment  of  renewable
energy and enhancing energy efficiency are components of many countries ’
nationally  determined  contributions  under  the  Paris  Agreement  adopted
under  the  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 1 and urges
effective and  timely support for the full implementation of all those
contributions, as applicable;      19-22494  6/8    Ensuring access to
affordable, reliable,  sustainable and modern energy for all  A/RES/74/225
19.  Notes that the impacts of climate change can also threaten access to and
the supply of energy, and also notes the importance of increasing the resilience
of the  energy  sector  to  climate  change,  which  can  be  facilitated  by
the  expansion  of  renewable energy;     20.  Emphasizes,  while  noting
progress,  that  the  large-scale  deployment  of  technologies has been
insufficient and uneven and that support is required to realize  their
potential,  along  with  appropriate  policy  initiatives  and  investments  at
the  national  and  international  levels,  with  Governments  working  in
collaboration  with  relevant stakeholders, including the private sector;
21.  Also emphasizes the value of regional and interregional approaches, which
can, among other advantages, enhance the deployment of renewable and
sustainable  energy by  facilitating the  sharing of  experiences, reduce
transaction costs, leverage  economies of scale, enable greater cross-border
interconnectivity to promote energy  system  reliability  and  resilience  and
augment  domestic  capacity-building,  and  recognizes the work of organizations
and initiatives in that regard;      22.  Invites  all  relevant  funding
institutions  and  bilateral  and  multilateral  the  private  sector  and
donors,  as  well  as  non-governmental organizations, to continue ongoing
efforts and take further action  to  provide  financial  resources,  as
appropriate,  to  support  efforts  aimed  at  ensuring  access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy in developing countries  and countries
with economies in transition, including low-emission, low-carbon and  climate-
resilient  new  and  renewable  resources  of  energy  of  demonstrated
viability,  especially  focused  on  energy  access  and  economic  development
in  both  urban  and  rural  areas,  while  noting  the  potential  catalytic
effect  of  concessional  and  other  finance  and  taking  fully  into  account
the  development  structure  of  energy-based  economies of developing
countries;     funding  regional  institutions,  23.  Encourages  the
development,  dissemination,  diffusion  and  transfer  of  environmentally
sound  technologies  to  developing  countries  on  mutually  agreed  terms,
including concessional and  preferential terms, and highlights the importance
of integrating sustainable energy in the Technology Facilitation Mechanism;
24.  Stresses  the  importance  of  strategies  and  contributions  by
Governments  and  relevant  stakeholders  to  multi-stakeholder  partnerships
in  ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern
energy  for  all,  and  encourages  coordination  and  collaboration  between
relevant  multi-stakeholder partnerships, such as Sustainable Energy for All;
the  United  Nations  and  25.  Recognizes the catalytic effect of the sharing
of knowledge and experience,  capacity-building  and  technical  assistance  on
sustainable  energy  deployment,  and  encourages existing and new efforts to
enable Governments of developing countries  and relevant stakeholders to plan,
finance, implement and monitor sustainable energy  projects to further
strengthen their national institutions and capacities;      26.  Encourages  the
development  of  viable  market-oriented  strategies  that  could result in
further rapid reductions in the cost of new and renewable resources of  energy
and  could  further  increase  the  competitiveness  of  those  technologies,
including  through  the  adoption,  as  appropriate,  of  public  policies  for
research,  development  and  market  deployment,  including  rationalizing
inefficient  fossil  fuel  subsidies  that  encourage  wasteful  consumption  by
removing  market  distortions,  in  accordance with national circumstances;
27.  Emphasizes  technology  and  entrepreneurship  in  developing  solutions
to  face  energy  challenges  and  achieve  energy  sustainability,  as  well
as  the  importance  of  investing  in  research  and  development in
sustainable energy technologies, and also emphasizes in this context  the  value
of  education,  academia,    19-22494  7/8    Ensuring access to affordable,
reliable,  sustainable and modern energy for all  A/RES/74/225    the  urgent
need  to  enhance  international  cooperation  to  facilitate  access  to  clean
energy research and technology, including renewable  energy,  energy  efficiency
and  advanced  and  cleaner  fossil-fuel  technologies,  and  improved
infrastructures  for  supplying affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for a ll;   28.  Calls  for  national  efforts  to  promote  access  to
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all  and
strengthened  local  engagement  to  complement  current  approaches,  and
reaffirms  the  commitment  to  supporting  subnational  and  local  efforts,
taking  advantage  of  their  direct  control,  where  applicable, of local
infrastructure and codes to foster uptake in end -use sectors, such  as
residential,  commercial  and  industrial  buildings,  industry,  agriculture,
transport,  waste and sanitation;    29.  Encourages  the  Secretary-General  to
continue  efforts  to  promote  the  provision  of  stable,  adequate  and
predictable  financial  resources  and  technical  assistance for sustainable
energy and to enhance the effectiveness, coordination and  full utilization of
appropriate international funds for the effective implementation of  national
and regional high-priority projects for ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all, and welcomes the convening of the high
-level  dialogue on the midpoint review of the United Nations Decade of
Sustainable Energy  for All (2014–2024), held on 23 and 24 May 2019;     30.
Invites  the  Secretary-General,  with  the  support  of  the  relevant  United
Nations system entities, to convene a high-level dialogue in 2021, financed
through  voluntary  contributions,  to  promote  the  implementation  of  the
energy -related  goals  and  targets  of  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable
Development 14  in  support  of  the  implementation  of  the  United  Nations
Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All,  including the global plan of action
for the Decade, as described in the report  of the  Secretary-General, and the
high-level political forum on sustainable development;     31.  Encourages UN-
Energy to support coherence and coordination among the  energy-related
activities  of  the  entities  of  the  United  Nations  development  system,
within  their  respective  mandates,  in  line  with  the  implementation  of
resolutions  71/243  of  21  December  2016,  72/279  of  31  May  2018  and
Economic  and  Social  Council resolution 2019/15 of 8 July 2019, in order to
assist countries, in particular  at  the  country  level,  upon  request  by
their  Governments,  by  explicitly  leveraging  partnerships with other
international organizations, donors and relevant stakeholders,  including  in
their  efforts  to  achieve  universal  access  to  sustainable  energy  and  to
accelerate its deployment;     32.  Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart
of the 2030 Agenda to leave no  one behind and commit to taking more tangible
steps to support people in vulnerable  situations and the most vulnerable
countries and to reach the furthest behind first;      33.  Calls  upon  the
Secretary-General  to  promote  renewable  energy,  energy  efficiency  and
related  sustainable  practices  in  all  United  Nations  facilities  and
operations around the world, where appropriate and economically viable;      34.
Requests  the  Secretary-General  to  submit to the  General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth  session  a  report  on  the  implementation  of  the  present  re
solution,  including  activities  carried  out  to  mark  the  United  Nations
Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy for All, and decides to include in the
provisional agenda of its seventy -fifth  session,  under  the  item  entitled
“Sustainable  development”,  the  sub-item  entitled  “Ensuring access to
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all ”.      52nd plenary
meeting  19 December 2019    19-22494  8/8