A/RES/66/206    United Nations  Distr.: General  13 March 2012  General Assembly
Sixty-sixth session  Agenda item 19 (j)    Resolution adopted by the General
Assembly on 22 December 2011  [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/66/440/Add.10)]  66/206.  Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy
The General Assembly,       Recalling  its  resolutions  53/7  of  16 October
1998,  54/215  of  22 December  1999 and 55/205 of 20 December 2000, and
recalling also its resolutions 56/200 of  21 December  2001,  58/210  of  23
December  2003,  60/199  of  22 December  2005,  62/197 of 19 December 2007 and
64/206 of 21 December 2009 on the promotion of  new  and  renewable  sources  of
energy  and  its  resolution  65/151  of  20 December  2010 on the International
Year of Sustainable Energy for All,   Takes note of the report of the Secretary-
General; 1  1.    2.  Notes the ongoing preparatory process for the United
Nations Conference  on  Sustainable  Development,  to  be  held  in  Rio  de
Janeiro,  Brazil,  from  20  to  22 June 2012;     3.  Welcomes  the  efforts
by  Governments  and  institutions  that  have  embarked  on  policies  and
programmes  that  seek  to  expand  the  use  of  new  and  renewable  sources
of  energy  for  sustainable  development,  and  recognizes  the  contributions
of regional initiatives, institutions and regional economic commissions  in
supporting  the  efforts  of  countries,  in  particular  developing  countries
and  countries with economies in transition, in this respect;    Invites Member
States, as well as the United Nations system and all other  relevant
stakeholders,  to  use  the  opportunity  offered  by  the  International  Year
of  Sustainable  Energy for  All  to raise global awareness of the importance of
new  and  renewable sources of energy and low-emission technologies, the  more
efficient use  of energy, greater reliance on advanced energy technologies,
including cleaner fossil  fuel technologies, and the environment-friendly use of
traditional energy resources,  as  well  as  the  promotion  of  access  to
modern,  reliable,  affordable  and  sustainable  energy  services,  and  notes
in  this  regard  the  initiative  of  the  Secretary-General  “Sustainable
Energy for All”;  4.    _______________  1 A/66/306.  11-47118  *1147118*
Please rec cle ♲ A/RES/66/206  5.  Notes  with  appreciation  regional  and
multilateral  mechanisms  and  initiatives  for  energy  cooperation  and
integration  to  encourage  the  use  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of
energy,  such  as  the  PetroCaribe  Alternative  Energy  Source  Financing
Fund,  the  Mesoamerican  Integration  and  Development  Project,  the
Caribbean Renewable Energy Development Programme, the energy initiative of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development, the Mediterranean Solar Plan, Energy+,
the  European  Union  Energy  Initiative  for  Poverty  Eradication  and
Sustainable  Development,  the  Paris-Nairobi  Climate  Initiative  on  Clean
Energy  for  All  in  Africa,  the  Africa-European  Union  Energy  Partnership,
the  Baltic  Sea  Region  Energy  Cooperation,  for  Energy  Efficiency
Cooperation,  the  Energy  and  Climate  Partnership  of  the  Americas,  the
Global  Bioenergy  Partnership,  the  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency,
the  Global  Alliance  for  Clean  Cookstoves,  the  Clean  Energy  Ministerial
and  the  Union  of  South American Nations strategy on energy;    International
Partnership  the  Stresses the importance of the continued substantive
consideration of the  6.    issue of the promotion of new and renewable sources
of energy;   7.    Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its  sixty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the
present resolution;   8.  Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixty-seventh session,  under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the
sub-item entitled “Promotion  of new and renewable sources of energy”.      91st
plenary meeting  22 December 2011  2