Table of Contents:  Programme rationale: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/KHM/  Programme rationale Country
context  The gross domestic product of Cambodia has more than tripled since 2000
with annual economic growth averaging  per cent and the country attaining lower
middle-income status in Cambodia is rapidly modernizing, and its economy
continues to transition from agriculture to industry and services The Government
has supported this transition through sound macroeconomic management, increasing
foreign direct investment (FDI), high labour force participation, growing
domestic resource mobilization and improved public services  Strong performance
has reduced poverty and improved human development The poverty rate declined
from per cent in 2004 to per cent in 2014; Cambodia has experienced one of the
fastest human development index rates of improvement in the region; growth is
relatively inclusive, with inequality remaining in check  Cambodia has not
adopted  national measure of multi- dimensional poverty, but international data
suggest that, although falling, the level is higher than income poverty  The
Government has clearly articulated the country’ development objectives The
Rectangular Strategy, , places good governance centre-stage and prioritizes
human resource development (HRD), economic diversification, private sector
employment, and inclusive and sustainable development This agenda is made
operational through the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP), which
integrates the Sustainable Development Goals7 and long-term development aims
articulated in the Government’ Vision 2030,  roadmap towards upper middle-
income status, and Vision 2050, when Cambodia aspires to become  high income
country Development challenges  The country’ fundamental development aim is to
continue its socioeconomic transformation driven through high levels of growth
with shared prosperity, alongside improved governance, human development and
better environmental outcomes Cambodia faces  set of complex, frictional
pressures associated with the middle-income transition  Recognizing this, the
Government is implementing policy reforms, strengthening public service delivery
and transitioning to  more sustainable growth model Rising domestic revenues
have reinforced these efforts, though policy, resource and capacity challenges
remain Ensuring better governance, human rights and rule of law is critical The
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) recognizes governance as
the lynchpin to achieving national development objectives and the Goals
Although growth has been high and inclusive, there is  need to promote
productivity and competitiveness, and ensure  more sustainable and resilient
economy The narrow industrial base and persisting low value-added production
(mainly garments and agriculture) underpin these concerns10 Similarly, for
households, although poverty is reducing and labour force participation is high,
the proportion vulnerable to falling back into poverty has increased, and most
employment remains informal11  World Bank, Ministry of Planning (MOP), National
Institute of Statistics (NIS)  UNDP Human Development Report (HDR), The Gini
coefficient has fallen from 38 in 1994 to 27 in 2014 (MOP/NIS)  Data for 2014,
suggest that 33 per cent of the population are multi-dimensionally poor (Oxford
Poverty and Human Development Initiative, 2017)  NSDP in force at the time of
writing covers 2014-NSDP  is being drafted  Rapid integrated assessment (RIA)
2016; mainstreaming, acceleration, policy support (MAPS) report Vision 2030 and
Vision 2050 remain unpublished but are referenced in speeches by the Prime
Minister:  comments-at-the-graduation-and-diploma-presenting-ceremony-of-the-
royal-university-of-phnom-penh/#more-Cambodia ranks 161 out of 180 on
Transparency International’ corruption perception index, NSDP  World Bank,
Cambodia Economic Update, April 11 Participation rates are 82 per cent for men
and 80 per cent for women  DP/DCP/KHM/  Such non-poor but vulnerable groups face
multiple challenges, and disparities, especially spatial ones, remain
significant12 Exclusion concerns extend to disadvantaged groups For example,
while persons with disabilities (10 per cent of the population)13 are
increasingly considered in national policies, they still experience
discrimination and challenges due to limited physical infrastructure and social
services People in remote areas risk exclusion, especially those living where
mines and explosive remnants of war (ERW) remain  threat; indigenous people and
forest dependent communities have seen their livelihoods adversely impacted by
socioeconomic change14  The status of women, though improving, is still highly
challenged Disparities in primary and secondary education, maternal mortality
and gender inequalities in decision-making have all narrowed15 However, violence
against women persists: one in five ever-partnered women have experienced
physical or sexual violence by their intimate partner at least once16 Challenges
the Government has prioritized include tackling gender-based violence, enrolment
in tertiary education, economic empowerment and increased participation in
public and professional life  The country’ demographics present threats and
opportunities: two thirds of the population are aged under 30 and youth
constitute 43 per cent of the working age population17 Yet over 50 per cent of
employed youth are undereducated and engaged in low-skilled labour, and
majority of the workforce are poor or in vulnerable employment18 Many Cambodians
migrate to find better jobs internally and abroad, specifically in Thailand19
The challenges are to provide quality education and skills and create decent
employment so that the demographic dividend enables  successful middle-income
transition Rapid development has exerted increasing pressure on natural
resources and biodiversity in rural areas and led to higher levels of waste and
air pollution in urban areas The degradation of natural resources has adversely
impacted rural livelihoods and reduced capacity for climate change adaptation
and mitigation, including to reduce emissions from deforestation and degradation
(REDD+)20 In 2017, the Government consolidated protected areas totalling more
than seven million hectares (or 40 per cent of total land)  number of other
legal and policy measures now in place to promote environmental sustainability
The primary need now is to assist national efforts to successfully translate
these policy measures into action Cambodia is among the world’ most vulnerable
countries to climate change21 Floods in 2011 and drought  are examples of severe
weather events that are forecast to become more frequent and extreme22 The
Government has responded with mitigation and adaptation measures but requires
further support Alignment to the Goals The Government is committed to the Goals
The Ministry of Planning (MOP), with UNDP support, has produced the Cambodia
Sustainable Development Goals Framework that nationalizes the Goals and includes
an 18th goal (end the negative impact of land mines and explosive remnants of
war, and promote victim assistance)23 The Goals are to be fully integrated with
national plans, 12 Although Cambodia is urbanizing, 80 per cent still live in
rural areas (where 90 per cent of those in poverty are located) 13 Cambodian
Demographic Health Survey, 2014, NIS 14 Cambodia common country assessment, 15
UNDP, HDR 16 The Government, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN- Women),
2015, National Survey on Women’ Health and Life Experiences in Cambodia 17
UNFPA, 18 Lower secondary education completion is 48 per cent for both men and
women 19 CDRI and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), 2017, Interrelations between Public Policies, Migration and Development
in Cambodia 20 Forest cover declined to 48 per cent (2016) from 73 per cent
(1965), UNDP, HDR total of 96 gigatonnes of carbon is stored in Cambodia’
ecosystems (Ministry of the Environment, United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) submission 2017) 21 Climate change vulnerability index,
2017; United Nations University global risk index 2017; Standard and Poor,
climate change vulnerability index 22Crowthers,  2016:  23 RIA and MAPS mission
reports, DP/DCP/KHM/ through UNDP support to the Council for the Development of
Cambodia (CDC) and the Ministry of Planning UNDP contributions: learning from
the past UNDP impact is greatest when it builds on its comparative advantage in
providing focused, relevant and effective technical support and its trusted
relationship with government24 UNDP has made significant contributions to policy
initiatives and institutional reforms The national industrial development policy
adopted  human development perspective in providing institutional support to
rigorous results-based approach linked to budgetary reforms25 With the support
of the European Union, Sweden, the United States and Japan, UNDP supported the
establishment of the National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD), an
inter-ministerial body to promote sustainable development This strengthened
overall leadership while enabling line ministries to climate-proof their
programmes26 Policy work must be underpinned by analysis guided by the
Government’ priorities27 The Cambodia development finance assessment (DFA)
identified potential new funding sources to inform national planning and
partnerships for the Goals28 The climate public expenditure reviews (CPERs)
mobilized national commitment by analyzing and prioritizing adaptation
investments29 The need for strong links between policy and impact is
fundamental lesson The theory of change acknowledges the risk that policy and
ground-level realities can diverge Partnering with local communities and civil
society organizations is essential to mitigating this Rigorous impact analysis
and sound political economy analysis are also key to ensuring the programme
delivers tangible results Opportunities to effect change The Government has
clearly articulated its vision to integrate 2030 Agenda in its plans and ensure
secure, inclusive and prosperous society, eliminating poverty and leaving no-one
behind To achieve this, the Government recognizes the need for effective public
institutions and  robust private sector Drawing on its global network, UNDP will
work with the United Nations country team to engage with the Government on
attaining the Goals In accordance with the UNDP Strategic Plan, ,30 and as an
“integrator”31 for the Goals in United Nations development system reform,32 UNDP
will help to create financing models to deliver higher volume, more effective
investment UNDP will move from funding towards financing, leveraging investment
in the 2030 Agenda particularly from the private sector, through sustainable
special economic zones and investments in affordable housing33 By 2025, it is
estimated that 80 per cent of all financing for the Goals will come from
domestic sources and FDI34 UNDP will therefore continue to explore with the
Government new ways to increase domestic and private sector financing for
development Taking the economic transition and sustainable natural resource
management as entry points to expand UNDP engagement on governance, the
programme will work to find ways in which public officials can better address
delivery to citizens in line with the Government’ commitments to improve
performance and accountability 24 UNDP outcome evaluation of the country
programme action plan, , mid-term review,  Ibid 26 Ibid 27 Poverty thematic
evaluation, 28 Cambodia DFA, CDC, 29 CPERs, , 2015, 30 UNDP Strategic Plan,
“Integrator” refers to  mechanism bringing together efforts to achieve the Goals
32 General Assembly resolution 72, “Repositioning of the United Nations
development system” 33 For example, UNDP collaboration on affordable housing,
34 Cambodia DFA, CDC, DP/DCP/KHM/ II Programme priorities and partnerships UNDP
country programme is aligned with the Rectangular Strategy and NSDP The
programme positions UNDP as  strategic partner to government with the objective
of adapting and implementing the Goals to support transition to upper middle-
income status through sustainable growth, eliminating poverty and leaving no one
behind This draws on the UNDP Strategic Plan, , and is an integral part of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2019-Building on
existing models, UNDP will bring in greater public and private investment UNDP
can help private investors do well by doing good, and realize the potential
financial and social returns in the 2030 Agenda UNDP will partner with financing
institutions, including international financial institutions (IFIs), to create
and test new investment vehicles for the Goals, and support delivery of
concessional loan financed programmes Using finance as an integrator for the
Goals, UNDP can provide  platform for other United Nations organizations to
participate in innovative collaborations Through the common chapter of their
respective strategic plans, , UNDP will work with UNFPA, the United Nations
Children’ Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), and others on social protection, youth
employment, women’ empowerment, forest protection, climate change, and access to
justice for persons with disabilities In  break from the supply-driven capacity-
building of the past, UNDP will work with government to create incentives for
civil servants and citizens to find their own ways to improve services In each
part of the programme, UNDP will support the Government to find innovative
solutions to long-standing institutional challenges The programme aims to
deliver on the pledge to leave no-one behind, targeting development results that
include and empower those below or near the poverty line, and vulnerable groups,
including women and girls, unemployed youth, persons with disabilities, sexual
minorities, and people living with HIV (PLHIV) The programme consists of three
inter-dependent pillars: prosperity, planet and peace Prosperity: expanding
economic opportunities The core objective is to support national transition
towards upper middle-income status through sustainable and inclusive growth
pathways The Rectangular Strategy prioritizes transformation towards  greener,
skills-based economy linked to innovation and the Fourth Industrial Revolution
UNDP signature solutions – () keeping people out of poverty, () sustainable
planet, and () closing the energy gap – underpin the theory of change and
programme formulation35 UNDP will maintain support for the CDC, Ministry of
Planning and the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MOEF) to plan, finance,
coordinate and monitor the NSDP, working with the support of Australia, the
European Union and Sweden This will include embedding tracking and
accountability mechanisms within national and sub-national systems and
programmes Maximizing equitable and green economic growth The national
industrial development policy provides  roadmap towards structural
transformation, greater productivity, higher value-added and diversification
UNDP will continue partnering with the CDC to support implementation,
recognizing that Cambodia is likely to begin preparations for graduation from
least developed country (LDC)36 status in the next decade UNDP will continue to
work with ministries of Mines and Energy, Environment, and Economy and Finance
to develop renewable energy solutions Working with the private sector, UNDP will
focus on de-risking solar investments 35 UNDP six signature solutions: poverty,
governance, resilience, sustainability, energy and gender equality 36 LDC status
is defined by the Committee for Development Policy:  criteriahtml  DP/DCP/KHM/
Creating greater value and combating rural poverty Upgrading agricultural value
chains is essential to improving agricultural productivity and helping the rural
poor become more resilient to external shocks Using blended finance and working
with the Ministry of Commerce (MOC), UNDP will facilitate improvements in farm-
level productivity and profitability to expand and enhance value-chains and
promote export diversification, especially in the cassava sector UNDP will
support government efforts to meet the national Goal 18: end the negative impact
of mines and explosive remnants of war, and promote victim assistance Working
with the Cambodian Mine Action and Victim Assistance Authority (CMAA), with the
support of Australia, Canada and Switzerland, UNDP will support making land safe
and productive UNDP will develop graduation- based models of social protection
to help end extreme poverty by boosting household productivity Upgrading the
skills of the next generation To maximize the demographic dividend, remain
competitive, and ensure growth stays inclusive, working age people need to be
able to access skills training while remaining in employment 37 With
Switzerland, Sweden, United Nations organizations, and research organizations,
UNDP will strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Labour and Vocational
Training (MOLVT) in policy-focused research, information management, innovation,
monitoring and communications UNDP will work with the National Employment Agency
(NEA) and private sector on expanding work opportunities for young people,
through entrepreneurship and using innovative tools and media Recognizing women’
contribution and securing their economic empowerment In collaboration with the
Ministry of Women’ Affairs, Sweden and the Cambodia Development Resource
Institute (CDRI), UNDP will provide  gender-based analysis of the national
economy to inform gender equality policies and enhance economic performance UNDP
will sponsor initiatives to empower women and girls as entrepreneurs and within
the labour market Leveraging private finance UNDP will deepen its Goals-related
engagement with the private sector and chambers of commerce, including the
expansion of social impact finance UNDP will work with the Phnom Penh Special
Economic Zone (PPSEZ) on low-cost housing, clean energy, waste recycling and
upgrading skills through the Sustainable Special Economic Zones initiative
Planet: sustainable living In line with the Rectangular Strategy and UNDP
signature solutions () building resilience and () sustainable planet, UNDP will
support environmental protection, working with the Government to ensure
sustainable natural resource management and build climate resilience This pillar
is closely associated with the peace, participation and accountability theme,
which addresses governance issues to improve environment and natural resource
management Strengthening institutional capacities Through the Ministry of
Environment and NCSD, and with the support of the European Union, Sweden and the
United States, UNDP will continue to support policy formulation and capacity
development for more environmentally sustainable development In addition, UNDP
will support the Government to ensure effective enforcement of Environment and
Natural Resource Code38 and related laws and regulations Partnerships with the
Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Supreme National Economic Council (SNEC)
will analyze and institutionalize an economic case for sustainable development
Promoting climate adaptation and mitigation Through the Global Environmental
Facility (GEF) Green Climate Fund, and the Forest Partner Carbon Facility
(FCPF), and with the Ministry of Environment and NCSD, UNDP will continue to
support line ministries in adopting and implementing gender-responsive climate
action UNDP will support REDD+ to enable the Government to access results-based
payments for reducing emissions from forestry UNDP will continue to support the
Government on disaster preparedness, operationalizing early warning and
monitoring systems and establishing and strengthening regional collaboration
with the Mekong River Commission, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and others for climate data -sharing UNDP will support the Ministry of
Environment, NCSD, the Ministry of Mines and 37 “Development goals in an era of
demographic change”, Global Monitoring Report, World Bank  Environmental codes
(draft), Ministry of Environment  DP/DCP/KHM/ Energy, and the National Committee
for Sub-national Development (NCDDS) to promote  green, circular economy through
sustainable waste management, sustainable transport management, improved energy
efficiency, and the adoption of clean energy Strengthening conservation and
environmental services The programme will continue to support the Ministry of
Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) for
the sustainable management of natural resources and biodiversity conservation
while strengthening capacities of local authorities and community-based
organizations to improve rural livelihoods, food security and effective climate
responses GEF, BIOFIN 39 and Payment for Ecosystem Services initiatives will
introduce incentive-based innovations that strengthen watershed restoration,
biodiversity conservation and natural resource management Leveraging private
finance In partnership with the Government, the programme will leverage private
sector investment for scalable climate initiatives and  circular economy Peace:
participation and accountability Just as good governance underpins the wider
Rectangular Strategy, the ‘peace’ pillar is central to the success of the other
two Improved state institutions, with more effective government-to- people
delivery, can improve the quality and inclusiveness of economic growth, through
social protection and protection of the rights of minorities Environmental
outcomes can be improved through more effective local governance UNDP will
explore innovative ways to empower citizens and work with Government incentive
structures to help build demand for better service delivery This pillar utilizes
signature solutions () effective, accountable and inclusive governance, and ()
gender equality Strengthening institutional capacity for the Goals and
accountable public services Working with the Ministry of Planning and the
Government as  whole, UNDP will support the development, adoption and monitoring
of the national Goals and their integration within national planning and sector
budgeting This will include assisting the Government to prepare  voluntary
national review40 With Government and other partners, UNDP will assist in
strengthening public service accountability and feedback mechanisms, and
informing government reforms and innovations to implement and monitor the Goals
Promoting gender equality With support from Sweden and others, UNDP will
continue policy and institutional support to the Ministry of Women’ Affairs to
address social norms that discriminate against women, and to promote their
economic empowerment, leadership, and participation in decision-making Together
with UN-Women and UNFPA, UNDP will contribute to national efforts to eliminate
violence against women, including through revision of domestic violence law
Supporting rights and leaving no one behind Rapid social and economic progress
risks excluding minority, marginalized and vulnerable groups Building on  United
Nations joint programme,41 UNDP will work with the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) and
the Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation (MOSVY) on
legal reforms to protect and include persons with disabilities Through the
regional programme ‘Being LGBTI42 in Asia’, UNDP will work with national
networks, supporting social tolerance and openness to promote the rights of
sexual minorities Following up on the Universal Periodic Review, UNDP will
develop rights-based initiatives on which the Government is able to engage UNDP
will support national commitments to expand social protection for the
vulnerable, specifically persons with disabilities and PLHIV 39 Biodiversity
Finance Initiative (BIOFIN):  40 Voluntary national reviews are encouraged as
basis for regular review by the high-level political forum 41 Disability Rights
Initiative Cambodia, UNICEF, UNDP, WHO, Australia,  Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender/transsexual and intersex (LGBTI)  DP/DCP/KHM/ III Programme and risk
management The programme will be nationally executed Implementing partner
selection will be guided by an assessment of capacities to maximize relevance,
efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability of interventions The harmonized
approach to cash transfers (HACT) framework will be used in collaboration with
other United Nations organizations to assess and manage financial risks Project
implementation modalities – national implementation, national implementation
with UNDP support, or direct implementation – will be determined in consultation
with the Government based on assessed risk ratings further to the HACT
assessment of potential implementing partners, and selected to maximize the
efficiency and effectiveness of UNDP contributions to development results In all
cases, the implementation modality will be grounded in strong national ownership
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013, all direct costs associated
with project implementation will be charged to concerned projects Long-
established working relations and excellent communications with CDC will ensure
results focus, effective programme management and proactive risk response
Project formulation will provide an opportunity for dialogue with the Ministry
of Economy and Finance to explore options for national funding UNDP active
engagement in the country team and collaboration with the resident coordinator
allow risks to be identified and managed in partnership with the Government by
adhering to United Nations norms and conventions, including those related to
human rights UNDP will seek to manage political risks by maintaining  strong
relationship with the Government and stakeholders, while maintaining  strictly
impartial stance and adhering to the normative values of the United Nations UNDP
will regularly share information with other United Nations organizations and
development partners UNDP will undertake regular monitoring through its own
mechanisms as well as via the United Nations Department of Safety and Security
(UNDSS) and will deploy appropriate measures in the event of emerging challenges
UNDP will adopt context-sensitive, do-no-harm principles to guide design and
implementation of this programme UNDP will manage resource mobilization risks by
widening the funding base to include new partners, including private and public
domestic sources Taking advantage of improved rules and regulations, UNDP
expects to improve delivery speed and quality Implementation and results are
monitored monthly, including ensuring resource mobilization and management are
prioritized For efficient delivery, UNDP will continue to reduce administrative
costs This CPD outlines the UNDP contribution to national results and serves as
the primary means of accountability to the Executive Board for alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to
country programmes are prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations
policies and procedures and the internal control framework IV Monitoring and
evaluation UNDP is committed to ensuring that development policy work is based
on learning and evidence At the project design stage, reflection and adaptation
will form part of  rigorous, fully- resourced evaluation strategy Projects will
be based on theories of change linked to results articulated in the country
programme, NSDP and the Goals Evaluation will allow projects to respond to
lessons learned and new opportunities Communication and outreach to  diverse
audience will continue, including use of multiple platforms and media UNDP will
ensure close monitoring and oversight, including spot checks, audit, field
visits and, where possible, community monitoring and evaluation UNDP social and
environmental standards and accountability mechanism will be applied To
strengthen and use national monitoring systems for the Goals, UNDP will partner
with the Government to design and implement  policy-relevant research agenda,
including use of innovation and new technologies in data generation, capture,
mapping, analysis and reporting UNDP will promote disaggregation of data
(gender, age, vulnerable groups and by geographical location) within
DP/DCP/KHM/ programming Partnerships with local research and policy institutions
will ensure impartial monitoring and evaluation while introducing new
perspectives The monitoring and evaluation plan is aligned with the national
Goals, UNDP Strategic Plan, , NSDP and UNDAF, 2019-Outcome results will be
monitored according to coordination mechanisms agreed between the Government and
country team  DP/DCP/KHM/ Annex Results and resources framework for Cambodia ()
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Capacity building and human resource development;
Poverty reduction and inclusive growth; Social protection; Revitalizing
agriculture; Health and nutrition; Physical infrastructure; Competitiveness;
Private sector development and employment Sustainable Development Goals: , , , ,
, , 10, 12, 17, 18 UNDAF OUTCOME : By 2023, women and men in Cambodia, in
particular those marginalized and vulnerable, benefit from expanded
opportunities for decent work and technological innovations; and participate in
growing, more productive and competitive economy, that is also fairer and
environmentally sustainable RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Advance poverty
eradication in all its forms and dimensions Indicative resources by outcome
(United States dollars) UNDAF outcome indicator(), baselines, target() Data
source and frequency of data collection, and responsibilities Indicative country
programme outputs (including indicators, baselines, targets) Major partners /
partnerships frameworks Regular: ,610,960 1a MPI-based on government data
Strategic Plan Outcome 1a Proportion of men, women and children of all ages
living in poverty in all dimensions, by selected measures of multi-dimensional
poverty Baseline: 33% (2014) Target: TBC Government CDC MoP MoEF SNEC CMAA
Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training NEA Ministry of Land Management,
Urban Planning and Construction (MLMUPC) Output : Extreme poor, disadvantaged
populations, including PLHIV and people with disabilities (PwDs), have access to
improved RGC social protection   Number of people participating in social
protection programmes supported by UNDP Baseline (2017): Total: 5900; PLHIV:
5900 (no gender disaggregation); Others:  Target: Total: 27,700; PLHIV: 17,700
(no gender disaggregation); Others (including PwDs): 10,000 (50% women) ID poor
database, project reports Other: 21,383,994  Cambodia Socio-economic Survey-
CSES; Cambodia Labour Force Survey UNDAF Outcome  Employment to population
ratio: () men/women; () youth () men/women; () PNH/other rural/ urban Baseline:
Civil society CDRI Centre for Policy Studies Cambodian Disabled People'
Organization (CDPO) PLHIV networks () (ii) (iii) %/% (2016) TBC %/%/% (2016)
Output  Government fosters productivity alongside inclusive/ sustainable growth
 Target (2023): () (ii) Base +% annually (iii) Base +% annually United
Nations/UNDP ILO Australia Switzerland Sweden UNICEF WHO UNAIDS UNIDO Base +%
annually : Number of adopted relevant RGC policies, plans and strategies
supported by UNDP Baseline (2018):  Target:  National reports  CSES;
MOEYS/MoLVT/ILO UNDAF Outcome  Human capital formation, numbers of people
benefiting from: () TVET; () entrepreneurship programmes Baseline: 10
DP/DCP/KHM/ () 21,740 (: 36%) () (iii) ,276 (50%/50%) Target: Base +10% Output
Left-behind and mine affected communities have access to safe land for better
livelihoods  Private sector PP-SEZ Green Leader Grab  NSDP  : () Area of mine-
affected land released (km2); () Number of people benefitting from UNDP assisted
mine action programme Baseline (2017): () 216 km2; () 908,958 (50% women);
Target: () 281 km2; () ,064,302 (50% women); CMAA UNDAF Outcome  RGC economic
strategy fully integrates SDGs approach and socioeconomic rights, via adoption
of: () CSDG-based NSDP 43 Baseline (2018): No Target: Fully  Data/report from
NIS UNDAF Outcome  Improved official statistics on gender and vulnerability
adopted: () Gender – adjusted wage gap men/women; () Gender - time use/valuation
of unpaid work; and () Cambodia-specific multi-dimensional poverty metric44
Baseline: Not in place Target: Developed and in place Output  Young women and
men have opportunities to progress through access to information, skills
development and improved employment policies  : Number of young women and men
() accessing online information, () using multi-media content, and () skills
certification Baseline (2018): ( to )  Target: () 20,000; () one million; and ()
,000 (50% women for all) Project data/NEA : Number of youth and gender-
responsive government employment policies Baseline (2018):  Target:  Government
gazette, project reports  Government administrative data UNDAF Outcome  Number
of participating in government-targeted United Nations-supported poverty
eradication/economic inclusion programmes, including social protection and mine
action Baseline (2018):  Target: at least 100,000  NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Revitalizing agriculture; Climate change, natural resources management and
biodiversity conservation; Good governance (environmental sustainability,
deforestation and degradation); Capacity-building and HRD Goals: , , , , , , 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 UNDAF OUTCOME : By 2023, women and men in Cambodia,
in particular the marginalized and vulnerable, live in  safer, healthier, more
secure and ecologically balanced environment with improved livelihoods, and are
resilient to natural and climate change related trends and shocks RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development UNDAF Outcome  Extent of land and natural resources tenure  MLMUPC
annual reports Output  Targeted cities and urban centres prepare and
operationalize solid Government MoE Regular: ,610,960 43 No/partially/fully 44
Not in place/developed/developed and in place 11 DP/DCP/KHM/ security, measured
in: () Number of total members of registered community fisheries and forestry
with tenure rights to fisheries and forestry resources Baseline (2017): 43%
Target: 58% waste management plan to reduce environmental pollution impact from
solid waste  Other: 42,767,987 NCSD MAFF NCDD- Phnom Penh municipal and
provincial authorities MoWRAM MRD MEF Ministry of Handicraft NCDM : Number of
cities/urban centres with operational Solid Waste Management Plans Baseline
(2018):  Target:  project reports  CSDG UNDAF Outcome  Percentage of communes
vulnerable to disaster shocks and climate change Baseline (2014): 49% Target:
35% Output  Climate and weather information is available for public and utilized
by policymakers for national, sectoral and sub-national planning, and
transboundary communication in the region  Civil society GGGI GERES RECOFIC
Conservation International WCS Oxfam CBOs WWF RUPP GCCC  CSDG UNDAF Outcome
Extent to which natural resources are protected, conserved and sustainably
managed, measured in: () percentage of forest cover; () percentage of protected
area (Strategic Plan 9a); Baseline: 14% (2016); 41% (2018) Target: TBD : Number
of national, sectoral and sub-national plans informed by accurate/ up-to-date
climate information Baseline (2017):  Target:  planning documents, budgets
referencing forecasts and products : End-to-end multi-sectoral EWS to limit the
gender- differentiated impact of natural hazards is operational (Strategic Plan
) Baseline (2018): No Target: Yes Project report  National communication, BUR,
NDC CSDG  UNDAF Outcome  Adoption of innovation, clean technology, sustainable
energy and sound chemical management, minimizing GHG, wastes and pollution
generation, measured in: () GHG emission saving from the manufacturing industry
(Gg CO2eq);45 () percentage of POPs reduction release Baseline: 405 (2015); %
(2017) Target: 508; % United Nations/ UNDP FAO UNEP WFP UNIDO JICA EU SIDA World
Bank ADB Output  Rules and regulations formulated and adopted for forest/natural
resource management and market solutions developed for conservation and
renewable energy   Endorsed policies, legislation, plans and strategies UNDAF
Outcome  Number of multi-sectoral policies, legislation, plans and strategies
relevant to sustainable production and living, which are developed/updated
Baseline (2018):  Target: 15 Private sector PP-SEZ : Number of rules and
regulations developed and adopted for forest/natural resource management
Baseline (2018):  Target: , MoE  CPERs, CSDG 45 Data are based on the Second
National Communication (2015), data for 2023 are not available The target in the
NDC is 727 Gg CO2eq by 12 DP/DCP/KHM/  UNDAF Outcome  Percentage of increase of
public expenditure for key areas: () public expenditure for climate action as %
of GDP Baseline (2016): % Target: % : Number of market solutions for
conservation and renewable energy in place Baseline (2018):  Target: , project
reports : Number of households benefitting from clean, affordable and
sustainable energy access (Strategic Plan indicator ); Baseline: (2018):
Target: 250 (at least 50 headed by women); programmatic data  Output  Climate
smart/proofed (rural) infrastructures and services benefit rural population,
especially poor and vulnerable  : Value of investments in target ministries
going through climate change screening processes Baseline (2017): $million
Target: $50 million Project report  : Number of climate smart/proofed
infrastructures built targeting poor and vulnerable communities and number of
households benefiting Baseline (2017): () 122; () 16,828 Target: () 400; ()
29,828 Project reports NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good governance (combating
corruption, deforestation and degradation, public financial management, legal
and judicial reform) Goals: , 10, 16, 17, 18 UNDAF OUTCOME : By 2023, women and
men, including those underrepresented, marginalized and vulnerable, benefit from
more transparent and accountable legislative and governance frameworks that
ensure meaningful and informed participation in economic and social development
and political processes RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development  - Programmatic data - New laws,
prakas, sub-decrees and policies adopted and published - Royal Gazette Output
Government builds an evidence-based monitoring, evaluation and reporting system
supportive of delivering the Goals  Regular: ,364,080 UNDAF Outcome  Number of
public laws and policies developed with support from the United Nations that
involve participation of rights- holders, especially women and discriminated
groups Government MoWA MOP NCDD- MCS MoSVY Other: ,127,998 : CSDGs adopted and
voluntary national report (VNR) submitted 13 DP/DCP/KHM/ Baseline (2018): 13
Target: 37 Disability Action Council (DAC) Baseline (2018): CSDG framework not
adopted; VNR not reported Target: CSDG adopted and  VNR submitted National
gazette UNDAF Outcome  Number of selected laws and policies that have been
adopted, amended and implemented to comply with recommendations of UPR, treaty
bodies, special procedures and the International Labour Organization (ILO)
mechanisms Baseline (2018): TBC Target (2023): TBC Civil society Silaka Oxfam
Committee to Promote Women in Politics (CPWP) Association of Sub-National
Administration Council (ASAC) CDPO CCC Youth networks LGBTI networks  - Laws and
policies adopted, amended and published - Reports of CEACR, ILO and government
reports Output  Women have improved status in leadership and decision-making  :
Number of studies produced, and policies adopted to promote gender equality and
address gender- based violence Baseline (2017):  Target:  studies;  policies,
national gazette, project reports : Percentage of women in management positions
in at least four line ministries supported by UNDP Baseline (2017): 25% Target:
33% MCS Strategic Plan Outcome 2b Proportion of women in managerial positions
Baseline: Minister 15%; Secretary and Under-secretary of state: 25%; Public
sector-director of department and above: % Target: Minister: 20%; Secretary and
Under-secretary of state: 30%; Public sector-director of department and above: %
 United Nations/UNDP UN Women UN-OHCHR UNAIDS UNFPA DFAT SIDA Republic of Korea
Output  Subnational administrations are able to deliver services in  transparent
and inclusive manner responsive to constituents’ needs  : Percentage of local
administration councillors and officials reporting improvement in their
performance as  result of training and other capacity development support from
the project (by sex) Baseline:  Target: 70% Project data, 2020 : Extent to which
the design/ development of key UNDP- supported local governance services is
inclusive and participatory Baseline: -Llimited Extent Target: -Great Extent
Programmatic data  14 DP/DCP/KHM/ Output  Capacity of PwD organizations and
networks improved to advance the rights of PwDs  : New national disability
strategic plan and other strategic documents developed with PwD organizations
Baseline (2018): Limited consultations with PwD organizations Target: Key
recommendations from PwD organizations reflected in the approved NDSP and other
policies/plans Official Gazettes/national policies on disability, project
reports : Number of PwDs, disaggregated by gender, with access to justice
through formal and informal systems (Strategic Plan indicator ) Baseline (2017):
Target: 50 (50% female) Project reports  15