 Cambodia Basic Energy Plan Published by Economic Research Institute for ASEAN
and East Asia (ERIA) Sentral Senayan , 6th floor, Jalan Asia Afrika no , Central
Jakarta 10270 Indonesia © Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia,
2019 All rights reserved No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in  retrieval system, or transmitted in any form by any means electronic or
mechanical without prior written notice to and permission from ERIA The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not necessarily
reflect the views and policies of the Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and
East Asia, its Governing Board, Academic Advisory Council, or the institutions
and governments they represent The Cambodia Basic Energy Plan was prepared by
the General Department of Energy (GDE) with input from the General Department of
Petroleum (GDP) of the Ministry of Mines and Energy and technical support from
the Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) The data and
information expressed herein help to facilitate the Ministry’ energy planning
processes and policy formulation However, the views and judgements expressed in
this plan are of technical experts in this publication may be freely quoted or
reprinted with proper Material acknowledgement Cover art by Artmosphere Design
Book design by Chrestella Budyanto National Library of Indonesia Cataloguing-in-
Publication Data ISBN: -- II FOREWORD Cambodia has experienced high economic
growth over the past  years and, according to the economic experts, this trend
will continue at least to 2020 and beyond In this regard, Cambodia’ energy
consumption could increase significantly Following the publication of Cambodia
National Energy Statistics 2016 with technical support from the Economic
Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA), the Ministry of Mines and
Energy (MEE) has benefitted greatly from the energy data and statistics as
foundation for its energy policy planning and policies However, the MEE needs
further support from ERIA to formulate policy targets with regard to energy use
in all sectors and to improve energy security in the country Thus, the Ministry
identifies the urgent need for the Cambodia Basic Energy Plan as it will lay out
targets and policy recommendations on oil and petroleum production and
consumption, electricity demand, renewable energy, energy efficiency, energy
security, and predicted future energy demand and supply To achieve energy policy
targets in the medium term as well as understand the policy implications for
energy security in the long term, there is  need for concrete programmes and
action plans for energy use and supply Thus, the MME needs an appropriate and
comprehensive basic energy plan to achieve its energy policy targets and
planning The Cambodia Basic Energy Plan aims to set numerical targets for each
energy issue covered by the plan, and the targets should be achievable The basic
objective of the plan is to seek an energy supply for Cambodia with the
following conditions: affordability, accessibility, security (sustainable
security), safety, and transparency in the energy market The Ministry made
request to ERIA to support the MME in setting up the basic energy plan In
response, ERIA kindly accepted the offer and in March 2018, formed  project team
consisting of international experts to work in collaboration with staff from the
General Department of Energy and General Department of Petroleum During the
project period, ERIA also conducted capacity-building training, such as on
building  basic understanding of energy data and statistics Lastly, the MME
would like to express its appreciation to ERIA for its technical and financial
support for publishing the Cambodia Basic Energy Plan Suy Sem Minister of Mines
and Energy, Cambodia March 2019 III ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The Cambodia Basic Energy
Plan was developed by  working group consisting of the Cambodian team and the
Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) team The Cambodian
team consists of staff from the General Department of Energy (GDE) and the
General Department of Petroleum (GDP) of the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME)
The ERIA team consists of experts on oil, electricity, renewable energy, energy
efficiency and conservation, energy security, and energy outlook modelling We
would like to acknowledge the members of the working group for their excellent
work We would also like to especially take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the staff of the GDE, GDP, and Electricité Du Cambodge (EDC) for
their cooperation on this project through their data and knowledge inputs
Special acknowledgement is also given to Mr Shigeru Kimura, Special Adviser on
Energy Affairs to the President of ERIA, for his excellent leadership of this
project Cheap Sour Director General General Department of Petroleum Ministry of
Mines and Energy Cambodia Victor Jona Director General General Department of
Energy Ministry of Mines and Energy Cambodia March 2019 IV PROJECT MEMBERS
Ministry of Mines and Energy HE Mr Victor Jona Director General, General
Department of Energy, Ministry of Mines and Energy, Cambodia HE Mr Cheap Sour
Director General, General Department of Petroleum, Ministry of Mines and Energy,
Cambodia Deputy Director General, Ministry of Mines and Energy, Cambodia Mr Heng
Kunleang Mr Chea Socheat Deputy Director General, General Department of
Petroleum, Ministry of Mines and Energy, Cambodia Mr Tan Sokun Director of
Department of Energy Development, Ministry of Mines and Energy, Cambodia Mr Kin
Sothea Deputy Director of Department of Energy Development, Ministry of Mines
and Energy, Cambodia Mr Chhim Bora Deputy Director of Department of Petroleum
Technology, Operation Supporting and Energy Security Mr Sok Chandareth Chief of
Statistics Office, Ministry of Mines and Energy, Cambodia Mr Heang Theangseng
Officer of Energy Planning Office, Department of Energy Development Mr Chea
Channara Director of Department of Petroleum Technology, Operation Supporting
and Energy Security  Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA)
Mr Shigeru Kimura Special Advisor to the President for Energy Affairs, Energy
Unit, Research Department, ERIA Dr Han Phoumin Energy Economist, Energy Unit,
Research Department, ERIA Mr Junichi Wada Senior Policy Advisor, Energy Unit,
Research Department, ERIA Mr Takahisa Hiruma Executive Vice President and
Director, Asiam Research Institute, Inc Ms Cecilya Malik ASEAN Energy Policy
Planning Expert, Indonesia Ir Leong Siew Meng Managing Consultant, Green Tech
Solutions, Malaysia Ms Maritje Hutapea Renewable Energy Expert, Indonesia VI
CONTENTS Disclaimer iii Foreword iv Acknowledgements  Project Members vii
Contents viii Tables ix Figures xii Abbreviations and Acronyms xv Executive
Summary  Chapter  Oil 15 Chapter  Electricity 55 Chapter  Renewable Energy 70
Chapter  Energy Efficiency and Conservation 88 Chapter  Energy Security 96
Chapter  Energy Outlook VII TABLES Annual Imports of Main Petroleum Products
(tonnes) Asia' Large Refineries Roadmap Power Generation Development Plan
Aggressive Generation Development Plan (revised existing plan) Power Generation
Capacity in Case  Power Generation Capacity in Case  Summarised Pattern of the
Power Generation Plan Natinal Transmission Master Plan (115 kV) Natinal
Transmission Master Plan (230 kV) Natinal Transmission Master Plan (500 kV)
Distribution Network Support Projects Time of Use Tariffs Number of Residents
Categorised by Capacity of Supply in 2017 Case Example of Cross-subsidy for Low
Consumption from High Consumption in the Rural Areas Case Example of Cross-
subsidy for Low Consumption from High Consumption in the Urban Areas
Composistion by Macro-economic Position in 2018 Feed-in Tariff for Renewable
Energy in Japan, 2012 Summary of Advantages and Disadvantages of Reneable
Portfolio Standards, Feed-in Tarrifs, and Net Metering   13 18 18 Table  Table
Table  Table  Table  19 21 23 29 30 30 34 44 47 Table  Table  Table  Table
Table  Table  Table  Table 10 Table 11 48 Table 12 49 Table 13 50 65 67 Table 14
Table  Table  VIII FIGURES Real GDP Growth Rate of Cambodia Demand Forecast by
ERIA (1000 ktoe) Example of  Promotion Method for Fuel Efficiency Summary of the
Issues and Policies on the Supply Side China' Net Exports of Petroleum Products
The Republic of Korea' Net Exports of Petroleum Products (1000 kl) Roadmap Power
Generation Capacity in Case  Power Generation Capacity in Case  Power
Development Plan and Basic Energy Plan for Cambodia in 2030 Levelised Cost of
Electricity of Coal and Hydro in 2015 Comparison of the Levelised Cost of
Electircity with the Investment Cost (Hydro) Levelised Cost of Electircity
Component Ratio for Coal and Hydro in 2015 Historical Coal Price Change from
1998 to 2008 Goal of National Grid Development by 2020 Power Installed in
Provinces via Several Voltage Interconnections from Neighbouring Countries
Transmission and Distribution Loss,  Distribution Losses System Average
Interruption Duration Index (minutes) System Average Interruption Duration Index
(times) Number of Households and the Electrification Rate Progress of
Distribution Network Development and Village Electrification Distribution of
Licence Zones and the State of Electrification at the End of 2016 Difference in
Tariffs by Percentage of Villages Covered by Electricity Licenced Areas
Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  13 20 22 24 25 Figure  Figure
Figure  Figure  Figure  26 Figure  26 Figure  27 29 32 Figure  Figure  Figure
33 34 35 36 37 40 Figure 10 Figure 11 Figure 12 Figure 13 Figure 14 Figure 15 40
Figure 16 42 Figure 17 IX Electricity Tariff Differences for Households
Electricity Tariff Differences in the MV at 22 kV Demand Differences Tariffs for
All Types of Residents' Electrical Consumption in 2017 Case Example of Cross-
subsidy for Lowe Consumption from High Consumption in the Rural Areas Case
Example of Cross-subsidy for Low Consumption from High Consumption in the Urban
Areas The Multiple Benefits of Energy Efficiency Historical Final Energy
Consumption by Commercial and Residential Sectors Historical Final Energy
Consumption by All Sectors in Cambodia Historical Electricity Consumption by the
Commercial and Residential Sectors Historical Electiricity Consumption by the
Residential, Commercial, Industry, and Other Sectors Percentage Shares of Energy
Sources for the Residential, Commercial, and Industry Sectors in 2015 Projected
Percentage of Energy Sources for the Residential, Commercial, and Industry
Sectors in 2030 Under the BAU Scenario Historical and Projected Energy Demand
and Energy Sources for the Residential Sector Historical and Projected Energy
Demand for the Residential Sector Under the BAU, EEF, and APS Historical and
Projected Energy Demand for the Commercial Sector Under the BAU, EEF, and APS
Historical and Projected Energy Demand for the Industry Sector Under the BAU,
EEF, and APS Strategic Framework for Formulating an EEC Plan Historical and
Projected Energy Demand in Cambodia Under the BAU, EEF, and APS Suggested EEC
Implementation Structure 43 45 46 47 Figure 18 Figure 19 Figure 20 Figure 21 49
Figure 22 50 Figure 23 71 72 Figure  Figure  72 Figure  73 Figure  73 Figure  74
Figure  74 Figure  75 Figure  76 Figure  77 Figure 10 78 Figure 11 79 80 Figure
12 Figure 13 85 Figure 14  Primary Energy Supply, BAU and APS Final Energy
Consumption by Sector, BAU and APS Final Energy Consumption Share by Sector, BAU
and APS Energy Indicators, APS Energy Import Dependency, BAU 97 98 99 100 100
Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  XI ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS Asian
Development Bank Agence Française de Développement APG generation and
transmission system planning ASEAN Power Grid alternative policy scenario APG
transmission system operator business as usual Basic Energy Plan for Cambodia
build, operate, and transfer build and transfer carbon capture and storage
compressed natural gas Cambodian National Mekong Committee carbon dioxide East
Asia Summit electric bike Electricité Du Cambodge energy efficiency energy
efficiency and conservation energy efficiency framework emergency preparedness
and response energy services company electric vehicle feed-in tariff gross
domestic product greenhouse gas Greater Mekong Subregion heavy fuel oil high
voltage International Energy Agency ADB AFD AGTP APG APS ATSO BAU BEPC BOT BT
CCS CNG CNMC CO2 EAS EB EDC EE EEC EEF EPR ESCO EV FIT GDP GHG GMS HFO HV IEA
XII IGCC IMF INDC IPP JICA kl ktoe kv kWh LCOE LPG LV MEPS MME Mtoe MV MW NESO
NLS & OECD PDP PV RE REE REF RPS SAIDI SAIFI TFEC TFES TOU TPES TWh USC
integrated gasification combined cycle International Monetary Fund Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution independent power producer Japan
International Cooperation Agency kilolitre kilotonnes of oil equivalent kilovolt
kilowatt hour levelised cost of electricity liquefied petroleum gas low voltage
minimum energy performance standards Ministry of Mines and Energy of Cambodia
million tonnes of oil equivalent megavolt megawatt National Emergency Supply
Organization New Lao Stove operation and maintenance Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development Power Development Plan photovoltaic renewable
energy rural electricity enterprise Rural Electrification Fund Renewable
Portfolio Standards System Average Interruption Duration Index System Average
Interruption Frequency Index total final energy consumption total final energy
supply time of use total primary energy supply terawatt hours ultra-
supercritical XIII XIV EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Background During 2010–2016, the total
primary energy supply (TPES) saw an increase similar to that of gross domestic
product (GDP) in Cambodia, but the TPES without biomass increased by  times and
was much higher than GDP ( times) in the same period (Figure ) Curbing coal,
oil, and electricity demand to the GDP level is crucial (Figure ) Cambodia has
increased its imports of coal and petroleum from other ASEAN countries such as
Indonesia and Singapore and this has affected Cambodian economic growth due to
the following defined formula of GDP: GDP =  +  +  +  –  : Private consumption +
government consumption : Private capital formation + government capital
formation : Stock change : Export : Import Consequently, the Ministry of Mines
and Energy (MME) needs an appropriate and comprehensive basic energy plan, and
the Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) is supporting the
MME to set up this plan The basic energy plan should contribute two points: ()
saving conventional energy consumption, such as oil and electricity; and ()
utilising domestic energy, such as hydropower and biomass XV Figure  Historical
Trend of GDP and TPES (2010=100) 220 180 180 160 140 120 100 80 2010 2011 2012
2013 2014 2015 2016 GDP TPES TPES without biomass GDP = gross domestic product,
TPES = total primary energy supply Source: Ministry of Mines and Energy, Figure
Primary Energy Consumption Share by Fuel 100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20%
10% % 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Oil Coal Hydro Biomass Electricity
import Source: Ministry of Mines and Energy, XVI Objective ERIA and the MME will
prepare  Basic Energy Plan for Cambodia (BEPC) that is appropriate,
comprehensive, feasible, and effective In addition, the basic plan should have
numerical targets for each energy issue covered by the plan, and the targets
should be achievable Basic principle The basic principle of the plan aims for an
energy supply for Cambodia with the following conditions: • Affordability •
Accessibility • Security (sustainable security) • Safety • Transparency of the
market The catchphrase of the plan is 2A2S+ In other words, the Cambodian energy
policies described in the BEPC would contribute to an energy supply in the
Cambodian market with affordability, accessibility, security, and safety +
transparency The target year of the plan is 2030, and the plan applies  rolling-
plan method that will be reviewed every five years Energy issues covered by the
BEPC Recognising the current energy issues in Cambodia, the basic plan covers
the following six energy fields: () oil, (ii) electricity supply, (iii)
renewable energy, (iv) energy efficiency, () energy security, and (vi) the
energy outlook brought by the BEPC Methodology Each energy field applies  common
approach: () () () Extract the current issues Set the appropriate targets for
solving the issues List the necessary action plans, polices, and roadmaps for
achieving the targets XVII Oil supply In Cambodia, gasoline, diesel oil, and
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) demand has been increasing rapidly, and the demand
has depended on imports Also, according to Cambodia’ energy outlook, which is
part of the East Asia Summit (EAS) energy outlook prepared by ERIA, these
petroleum products will increase their demand continuously up to In this regard,
the following countermeasures are recommended: () The major use of gasoline and
diesel oil as well as LPG is transportation (vehicle), so that Cambodia can
shift to highly efficient vehicles under the appropriate regulations (reduction
by 10% from the business-as-usual [BAU] scenario) Petroleum products are
convenient and useful, and they are used across the industry, transport,
residential, and commercial sectors If  petroleum supply disruption occurs,
Cambodia will face serious damage on both the economic and social aspects
Therefore, appropriate stockpiling volumes, including commercial stocks, will be
needed (at least 30 days until 2030) () () Biofuel, especially bioethanol, is
one of the options for reducing imports of gasoline In addition, biofuel affects
the economic growth of Cambodia, such as through agriculture and industry
activities and reductions in CO2 emissions The General Department of Petroleum
is seeking business opportunities for biofuel (E3 gasoline will be possible by
2025) () The BEPC also states that the petroleum supply chain will be resilient
through business activities under the appropriate petroleum policies and
regulations Electricity supply Electricity demand increased significantly by 18%
per year during 2010–2016, and, in parallel, power generation increased by 19%
per year in the same period Previously, Cambodia fully depended on oil power
generation and imports from neighbouring countries, but since coal and
hydropower generation has increased rapidly, imports of electricity have largely
decreased compared to The Cambodia energy outlook also reports that its
electricity demand will increase by  times from 2015 to Based on this situation,
the BEPC recommends the following countermeasures: () The power generation mix
in 2030 will be coal (35%), hydro (55%), and renewable energy (10%), consisting
of biomass and solar/photovoltaics (PV) This mix will maintain affordability and
security () Resilience of the transmission and distribution networks will bring
improvement of transmission and distribution losses (13% in 2016 to % in 2030),
decrease the System Average Interruption Duration Index and System Average
Interruption XVIII Frequency Index to less than 620 minutes and  times,
respectively, and increase the household electrification ratio from the current
70% to 95% in 2030 through connecting to the national grid This will contribute
to accessibility, security, and safety () Reforms of electricity tariffs, such
as time-of-use and cross-subsidy systems, have to contribute to the levelisation
of electricity demand and elimination of the price gap between urban and rural
areas and maintain affordability and transparency Renewable energy Renewable
energy consists of hydro, biomass, and solar/PV in Cambodia Wind is very hard to
install due to insufficient wind conditions in Cambodia Hydro will increase
continuously as  major power source based on its affordability and security
Biomass and solar/PV are treated here () Traditional biomass will be phased out
and replaced by LPG for its use for cooking in rural areas However, highly
efficient biomass cooking stoves are recommended  biomass supply chain might be
established to supply fabricated biomass such as wood chips to final users in
rural areas Another biomass use will be power generation to be applied in
isolated areas (with no national grid) Its target will be % of total power
generation in () () There are several policies to promote solar/PV systems, such
as feed-in tariffs, Renewable Portfolio Standards, and net metering However, the
BEPC recommends not to apply these policies for the penetration of solar/PV The
MME will open the power generation market to local and foreign entities such as
the Asian Development Bank and private companies to install solar/PV in Cambodia
for supplying electricity to subscribers Its target will be % in Energy
efficiency Energy efficiency is crucial for Cambodia because the TPES without
biomass has increased much more than GDP growth, as mentioned before On the
other hand, energy prices in Cambodia, such as for electricity and LPG, are
fully marketed (no subsidies) and this brings incentives for energy consumers,
such as saving energy costs through applying energy efficiency and conservation
(EEC) activities Thus, the necessary EEC policies, action plans, and targets of
the industry, commercial, and residential sectors are specified here, especially
for saving electricity consumption The BEPC recommends the following: XIX ()
Apply the same energy saving target,  10% reduction from the BAU, across sectors
until () Apply  standards and labelling system to appliances used by households
An inspection laboratory will need to be set up in Cambodia () The MME has to
grow local energy managers and invite energy service companies, both local and
foreign companies, for engaging in engineering EEC activities in the industry
(factories) and commercial (buildings) sectors In this regard, an association of
energy managers or energy service companies, such as the Cambodia Chapter of the
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-conditioning Engineers, will
be established Education and campaigns on EEC are important and will contribute
to making Cambodian people aware of EEC () () When EEC becomes popular in
Cambodia, the MME will have to set up an EEC regulation under the electricity
law The regulation will support the EEC action plans mentioned above Energy
security There are many energy security issues, such as the diversity of energy
supply sources outside Cambodia, the increase of domestic energy such as hydro
and biomass, emergency preparedness and response (EPR), stockpiling, the
resilience of the energy supply chain, and power grid interconnection in the
Greater Mekong Subregion Here, we introduce only EPR and grid interconnection ()
EPR is  plan or procedure for when Cambodia faces an emergency EPR clearly
specifies three measures: short term, medium term, and long term The short- term
measure emphasises how to reduce energy consumption quickly, while the medium
and long-term measures mention the diversity of energy supply sources, promotion
of EEC, and stockpiling The establishment of the National Emergency Supply
Organization (NESO) is also very important NESO consists of several ministries
(energy, industry, commerce, transport) and large energy supply and consumption
companies, and is headed by the prime minister NESO works on the coordination,
harmonisation, and prioritisation of  limited energy supply to final users under
an emergency () Cambodia has imported electricity from Viet Nam and Thailand
historically and will import it from Lao PDR soon As such, Cambodia has already
joined  grid interconnection network amongst the countries, but this is on
bilateral basis According to the BEPC, 60% of power generation will come from
hydropower plants, and this will depend on the volume of water flow, which is
usually affected XX by climate conditions In order to secure electricity supply
in Cambodia,  power trade system on  multilateral basis is recommended Energy
outlook Two energy outlooks, business as usual and the alternative policy
scenario (applying targets specified by the BEPC), are projected up to Both
outlooks show the trends of total final energy consumption (TFEC) and TPES up to
Thus, the MME will surely monitor the actual TFEC and TPES from Cambodia’ energy
balance tables to be produced continuously after 2017 and compare them with the
projected trends in the BEPC If the actual TFEC or TPES differs from the trends,
the MME will make checks (regarding why the difference is generated) and take
action (revise action plans and policies) by applying  Plan-Do-Check-Action
cycle However, the TFEC and TPES can become volatile depending on the economic
conditions, such as GDP, so that the intensity defined as TFEC/GDP and TPES/GDP
is better than the TFEC and TPES themselves The intensity of the TFEC is shown
in Figure  Figure  TFEC Intensity under the BAU and APS Outlooks 500 450 400 350
$       300 Intensity BAU 250   Intensity APS  /    200 150 100 50  2015 2020
2025 2030 BAU = business as usual, APS = alternative policy scenario, TFEC =
total ﬁnal energy consumption Source: Author’ calculation XXI XXII CHAPTER  OIL
Issues and required policies for petroleum products on the demand side  The
demand trend Cambodia has attained high economic growth since Although growth
was temporarily stagnant due to the global financial crisis in 2009, it
continued to increase by % from 2011 onwards According to the International
Monetary Fund and the Asian Development Bank, the Cambodian economy is expected
to continue growing steadily, supported by strong domestic demand Figure  Real
GDP Growth Rate of Cambodia      2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
2016 GDP = gross domestic product Source: International Monetary Fund  CAMBODIA
BASIC ENERGY PLAN Economic growth has increased demand for petroleum products,
and petroleum product imports have continued to increase From 2012 to 2016, the
demand for petroleum products increased by % per year Amongst them, gasoline,
diesel oil, and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), which are the main products,
showed high growth rates of %, %, and %, respectively Furthermore, according to
the demand forecast by the Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia
(ERIA), the total demand for petroleum products in the year 2040 is expected to
be ,650 kilotonnes of oil equivalent (ktoe) (% growth per year) under the
assumption of stable economic growth Table  Annual Imports of Main Petroleum
Products (tonnes) 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Gasoline 387,729 392,011 426,830
481,671 490,898 Diesel 897,641 918,437 ,005,484 ,073,248 ,240,184 LPG 84,678
98,692 112,120 162,332 193,595 LPG = liqueﬁed petroleum gas Source: Customs
Statistics Additionally, in the future, gasoline and diesel oil demand for the
transportation sector, LPG demand for households, and fuel oil and LPG demand
for the industry sector will increase until Figure  Demand Forecast by ERIA
(,000 ktoe) ,000 ,650 ,000 ,000 ,510 ,000 ,400 ,000 660 60 20  Gasolene Kerosene
Diesel Fuel Oil LPG Total 2015 2040 ERIA = Economic Research Institute for ASEAN
and East Asia, ktoe = kilotonnes of oil equivalent, LPG = liqueﬁed petroleum gas
Source: ERIA Outlook Because Cambodia is in the development stage, it is
expected that oil demand may increase more than the economic growth rate at
times Therefore, it is important to consider how to respond to increasing oil
demand With the expansion of demand, we have to consider the following issues: •
Environmental burden • Accidents in each field • Deterioration of the trade
balance There is concern that the environmental burden, such as air pollution,
will become worse, and the number of accidents will increase The trade balance
will also worsen due to an increase in imports of oil Therefore, it is necessary
to improve the quality of petroleum products to prevent air pollution and to
strengthen the regulations for fire prevention in oil storage, transportation,
and sales In Asia, the environmental burden has increased due to the rapidly
rising oil demand in some countries, but measures have been taken when the
problem has become serious It is necessary to implement countermeasures at the
appropriate time, taking this as  lesson It is also important to promote energy
saving and alternative energy and take measures to prevent international oil
supply disruptions and oil supply shortages due to natural disasters  Action
plans and necessary policies on the demand side () Energy saving in the
transport sector Energy saving not only improves the international balance of
payments by reducing the imports of fossil fuels but also contributes to
reducing the environmental burden The following are effective examples of action
plans in the medium-to-long term: Import restrictions on old cars (medium or
long-term policy) • • Preferred tax system for fuel-efficient cars (medium-term
policy) • Fuel consumption regulation by type of vehicle (long-term policy)
CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure  Example of  Promotion Method for Fuel
Efficiency Understanding the current situation Average car age Improvement
target 15 years in 2030 Car import ban for 15 years or more Promotion measures -
Import regulation - Inspection regulation - Vehicle tax Cars over 12 years are
inspected every year New-car tax reduction Annual grasp Register and discard
Source: Asiam Consultation and cooperation with the relevant ministries and
agencies, such as the Ministry of Transportation and the Ministry of Economy and
Finance, are necessary to implement these action plans () State of demand for
petroleum products In order to extract the issues and formulate policies, it is
important to grasp the actual state of the consumption of petroleum products and
recognise the products that are being rapidly expanded It is necessary to have
system for periodically collecting the required data from oil companies and
conducting market research Also, in future, if we can clarify the data on
petroleum consumption intensity for each sector, the targets for fuel efficiency
and alternative energy will be clearer () Promotion of alternative energy
Biogasoline, electric vehicles (EV), electric bikes (EB), and compressed natural
gas (CNG) have the effect of decreasing oil demand The balance between the
benefits of reducing oil imports and the costs of introducing alternative energy
should be studied, and, in order to assess the benefits,  pilot project should
be considered  () Establishment of the quality specifications for petroleum
products The quality of petroleum products is also an issue on the supply side,
but quality assurance is an effective policy for reducing the environmental
burden, such as air pollution associated with the expansion of demand Quality
should be gradually improved while looking at the circumstances of neighbouring
countries () Strengthening of regulations aimed at preventing accidents There is
risk that accidents will increase due to the expansion of oil demand Regulations
are required to prevent accidents in the fields of oil storage, transportation,
sales, and consumption Especially for LPG, since accidents at the consumption
stage have been increasing, consumer awareness is important  Issues and required
policies for petroleum products on the supply side  The supply situation
Cambodia currently imports 100% of its petroleum products The import sources are
mainly Thailand, Viet Nam, and Singapore Quality specifications of petroleum
products have not been established, so there are variations in the quality of
imported goods Meanwhile, the construction of  domestic refinery is planned by
private enterprise Because this refinery is small in size, there is  possibility
that it will be subject to severe competition from imported goods Having
refineries in the country is important for energy security, but it is necessary
for the refineries to be competitive with refineries in the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) region There are large refineries in Asia, as
shown in Table   CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Table  Asia’ Large Reﬁneries Country
Company Location Cap ,000b/ Korea SK energy Ulsan 840 Korea GS caltex Yeosu 785
Korea -OIL Onsan 669 Korea Hyundai Daesan 390 Singapore Exxon Mobil Jurong 593
Singapore Shell Bucom 462 Singapore SPC Merlimau 290 Taiwan FPCC Unrin 540
Taiwan CPC Darin 300 Taiwan CPC Takao 220 Taiwan CPC Toen 200 Thailand Esso
Sriracha 177 Thailand BCP Bangchak 120 Thailand TOC Sriracha 275 Thailand PTT
Map ta Phut 280 Thailand IRPC Rayong 215 / = barrels per day Source: Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan  Action plans and necessary policies on the
supply side The most important objectives are affordable prices and an
accessible and safe supply of oil This will contribute to national security and
economic growth and will be achieved through  transparent market The relevant
agencies and companies can contribute to the petroleum market data on supply and
demand and prices  transparent market will promote the following: • The
diversification of supply sources • Resilience in the supply chain of petroleum
products Laws and regulations and  preferential tax system are the platform of
transparent market and also contribute to ensuring safety and the promotion of
fuel efficiency and alternative energy In order to advance these policies,
cooperation with the related ministries and agencies is necessary  Figure
Summary of the Issues and Policies on the Supply Side Affordable price and
accessible and safety supply National security Economic growth Stockpiling
Transparent market Diversiﬁcation of supply sources Resilience on supply chain
of petroleum products Import from many countries Promotion of Laws and
regulations Tax measures Fuel efficiency Domestic reﬁnery Alternative energy -
Business activity - Quality speciﬁcations Biogasoline CNG, EB, EV Needed to be
competitive CNG = compressed natural gas, EB = electric bikes, EV = electric
vehicles Source: Author () Early promulgation and the implementation of laws and
regulations Laws and regulations are the platform of  transparent market and
contribute to ensuring safety The following laws and regulations are ready, and
early promulgation and implementation are expected: • Petroleum Law • Sub-decree
on Licenses and Permit Letters • Specifications of petroleum products •
Assurance of quality of petroleum products • Technical Regulation on Storage
Tanks • Technical Regulation on Petroleum Service Stations • Technical
Regulation on Bottling Stations of LPG • Technical Regulation on Storage of LPG
CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN () Diversification of supply sources The oversupply
of petroleum products in China, the Republic of Korea (hereafter, Korea),
Taiwan, India, and the Middle East is expected to continue in the medium term,
and Cambodia should seek cheap procurement sources The diversification of supply
sources also contributes to energy security Understanding the price formulas of
importing petroleum products is important In an oversupply environment, it is
encouraged that importing companies look for the appropriate procurement sources
: China’ export volume of petroleum products is over 15 million kilolitres (kl)
per year Figure  China’ Net Exports of Petroleum Products 25,000 15,000 ,000
,  -,000 -15,000 -25,000 -35,000 Fuel Oil Kerosene Diesel Gasoline kl =
kilolitres Source: Asiam  : Korea’ export volume of petroleum products is over
40 million kl per year Figure  The Republic of Korea’ Net Exports of Petroleum
Products (,000 kl) 45,000 40,000 35,000 30,000 25,000 20,000 15,000 10,000 ,000
Kerosene Diesel Gasoline kl = kilolitres Source: Asiam () Promotion of
transparent market Currently, Cambodia lacks statistical data on the oil market
For statistical data on supply and demand, although the energy balance table has
been developed, it must be continuously updated and further improved in its
level of detail, such as for petroleum demand and supply data on both  yearly
and monthly basis It is also necessary to further improve the data, such as on
the number, size, and location of oil terminals, LPG bottling stations, gas
stations, and petroleum service stations, etc Increasing market transparency
will lead to the following: • Resilience of the supply chain of petroleum
products • Investment opportunities for market participants • The fostering of
strong and active oil industry  CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Such  market
environment will contribute to affordable prices and an accessible and safe
supply () Quality assurance of petroleum products  Establishment of quality
specifications Currently, since Cambodia imports all its petroleum products, it
is necessary to check the specifications of the exporting countries and
determine the specifications for Cambodia, taking into consideration the balance
between the purchase price and the environmental burden, as high-quality
products have high prices  Promulgation of the prakas (regulations) Based on the
Petroleum Law, restrictions on quality assurance at the time of storage,
transfer, and sale of petroleum products should be conducted In the prakas, the
following shall be stipulated Clarification of who is obligated The refinery
(petroleum products producer), oil terminal, petroleum service station, gas
station, or LPG bottling station should be obligated to ensure quality
Designation of inspection centres The Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME) should
designate inspection centres with capacity and experience Those obligated to
ensure quality must periodically undergo inspection by the MME The inspection
centre performs quality inspection practices by receiving consignments from the
MME Refineries, oil terminals, petroleum service stations, gas stations, and LPG
bottling stations can also ask for inspections from inspection centres
Inspection items In order to shorten the time required for inspection and to
reduce the inspection costs, inspection items should be set and be subject to
inspection () Stockpiling of petroleum products (including crude oil) Currently,
importing companies are carrying out commercial stockpiling for 30 days
according to the prakas by the Ministry of Commerce This should be executed
reliably by the Petroleum Law to ensure industry stock (strategic petroleum
reserves by private companies) Oil stockpiles are an effective means of
countering the risk of disruptions in international markets, such as sudden
crude oil supply shortages due to accidents and natural disasters, and it is
necessary to gradually strengthen oil stockpiles Also, the 10 national stock
(strategic petroleum reserves by the government) should be considered in the
medium or long term There are also low-cost methods, such as ticket stockpiling
in foreign countries, and various options that should be considered ()
Introduction of biogasoline (E3) Cambodia has crude oil resources, but their
development will take time There are no oil- refining facilities in the country
at the present time, and all petroleum products depend on imports, which is
critical issue for the national trade balance Because of this situation,
biogasoline, as  domestically produced liquid fuel, is important for the
improvement of the national trade balance and energy supply security The
development of biogasoline can form an industry chain of cassava cultivation,
bioethanol manufacturing, and biogasoline production The promotion of
biogasoline contributes to improving farmers’ incomes, reducing gasoline
imports, and reducing greenhouse gases The key to successfully introducing
biogasoline into Cambodia is to reduce the production cost of cassava as  raw
material, reduce bioethanol production costs, and promote the consumption of
biogasoline Establishing bioethanol policies and related regulations, such as
biogasoline specifications, safety regulations, and roadmaps, is also required
To achieve these policy objectives, cooperation between the related ministries
and agencies is indispensable Regarding the quality specification of
biogasoline, it is preferable to upgrade step by step to ethanol protection
engines, such as from E3 to E5 and E10, according to vehicle speed E3, which is
blended ethanol %, should be the first step because E3 has no effect on old cars
In order to introduce biogasoline into Cambodia, it is necessary for the
government to encourage it by providing some incentives, and the promotion of
pilot project would also be effective The primary goal of the pilot project
would be to catch the issues that may occur during the initial deployment and
promptly take effective countermeasures 11 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN : Targets
of the pilot project: • Catch issues and consider countermeasures • Secure the
ethanol supply chain Improve public consciousness • : Benefits of the
introduction of biogasoline: • Agricultural industry development - Increase in
cassava demand : increase in farmer income Improvement of the trade balance -
Reduction in the outflow of Cambodian monetary assets Improvement of energy
security - Reduction in reliance on imported fossil fuels • • • Greenhouse gas
reduction - Bioethanol can replace gasoline consumption and reduce CO2 ()
Resilience of the supply chain of petroleum products Based on the medium-to-
long–term forecast for the demand for petroleum products, the government needs
to prepare  petroleum supply plan The objective of the petroleum supply plan is
to consider optimal logistics measures, assuming the scale, location, and timing
of the new expansion of the oil supply base This will lead to resilience of the
supply chain of petroleum products •  reasonable supply plan should be
considered based on the demand assumptions by province • The supply plan should
include new or expansion plans for refineries, import terminals, and secondary
terminals and their locations, sizes, and timing • The optimal means of
transportation should be studied, such as tank trucks, ships, railroad, and
pipelines The above are the optimal logistics based on the supply plan 12 Figure
Roadmap 2019 2020 2021 2022   Petroleum Law Sub-decree Prakas Prakas Prepare
Operation of inspection center step by step Quality assurance Draft Prepare E5,
E10 Nationwide E3 Pilot project Biogasoline Policy of MME Adoption of
Biogasoline Policy Preparation Grasp actual condition every year and to be
revised Supply Plan Certain execution 30 days step by step SPR  days Stockpiling
Source: Author  Conclusion Oil demand in Cambodia has increased rapidly in
recent years, and it is expected that it will continue to increase with economic
growth in the future With the expansion of demand, we have to consider the
environmental burden, the accidents in each field, and the deterioration of the
trade balance It is necessary to take countermeasures at an appropriate time
before problems become serious It is also important to promote energy saving and
alternative energy sources and take measures against international oil supply
disruptions and shortages due to natural disasters The action plans and
necessary policies on the demand side are as follows: () Energy savings in the
transport sector through the promotion of eco cars () Grasping of the actual
state of demand for petroleum products () Promotion of alternative energy ()
Establishment of quality specifications to prevent air pollution ()
Strengthening regulations aimed at preventing accidents, including on the supply
side 13 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN On the other hand, the most important
objectives of the supply side are affordable prices and an accessible and safe
supply This will be achieved through  transparent market This means that the
data on supply and demand and prices should be maintained so anyone can access
the data on the petroleum market In addition, laws and regulations and
preferential tax system are the platforms for  transparent market and also
contribute to ensuring safety and the promotion of fuel efficiency and
alternative energy Collaboration with the related ministries and agencies is
necessary to advance them The action plans and necessary policies on the supply
side are as follows: () Early promulgation and implementation of laws and
regulations () Diversification of supply sources () Promotion of  transparent
market () Quality assurance of petroleum products () Stockpiling of petroleum
products (including crude oil) () Introduction of biogasoline (E3) () Resilience
of the supply chain for petroleum products 14 CHAPTER  ELECTRICITY  Review of
the current situation and selected major issues This chapter focuses on
Cambodia’ basic electricity plan The electricity plan of Cambodia has been
conducted based on the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2014–The
government focuses on () ensuring supply capacity, (ii) improving
electrification, and (iii) reducing tariffs The content has been concluded as
follows  Ensuring supply for the best energy mix • Reduce reliance on petroleum
fuels for electricity generation so supply capacity and diversified energy
sources such as hydropower, natural gas, and coal are expanded • Hydropower and
coal-fired power plants are broadly preferred along with the import of
electricity from neighbouring countries Invest in electricity generation
infrastructure focusing on technical and economic efficiency and minimising the
environmental and social impacts by the private sector, such as independent
power producers (IPPs) • • Encourage the efficient use of energy and mitigate
the adverse effects on the environment resulting from energy supply and use
Outstanding issues • The maximum electricity production from hydropower plants
occurred only in the rainy season In the dry season, the power production
generated was only 25%   15 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN  Improving
electrification by expanding transmission and distribution networks • To reduce
electricity losses, transmission and distribution networks are expanded • To
regionally expand economic cooperation, which maximises the use of resources in
the region to achieve the most benefit, Cambodia has been participating in the
implementation of  Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) power trade plan and the ASEAN
Power Grid plan • To strengthen energy security and ensure an efficient, safe,
high-quality, reliable, and affordable electricity supply, all levels of the
transmission and distribution networks are developed Invest in transmission and
distribution infrastructure focusing on technical and economic efficiency and
minimising the environmental and social impacts by the private sector • To
realise the goal that ‘by 2020, all villages in the Kingdom of Cambodia will
have access to electricity supplied by the national grid and other sources’,
implementation of the electrification strategy is accelerated • Promote regional
electricity trade through bilateral and multilateral cooperation Outstanding
issues • Due to the high costs required to build electricity infrastructure in
numerous rural areas in Cambodia, the electricity supply in rural areas is
limited as most areas are not yet connected to the grid • The expansion of
distribution lines to rural areas is limited, and the unit cost remains
relatively high compared to the unit cost in neighbouring countries  Reducing
tariffs to make them more affordable • Further support the rural electrification
fund aimed at acquiring equitable electricity access for all citizens through
government funding and social funding by Electricite Du Cambodge (EDC), and seek
funding support from other development partners • Pursue rational measures for
electricity consumption by reducing power tariffs during off-peak hours to serve
production and irrigation systems aimed at improving agricultural productivity
and accelerating the development of industry and handicraft sectors 16 •
Maximise revenue inflows through multi-layered revenues such as royalties,
production sharing, and income tax to increase the government’ financial
capacity • Reduce tariffs to an appropriate level in the whole country
Outstanding issues • Electricity tariffs in rural areas are higher than in urban
areas • The tariff cost is relatively high compared to the tariff cost in
neighbouring countries To solve the above outstanding issues, this chapter
reviews the current situation, describes the targets for 2030, and considers the
necessary policies with  roadmap  Generation  Targets by 2030 According to the
Ministry of Mines and Energy’ (MME) generation development plan for 2017–2030
(Table ) and the forecasted demand by the Economic Research Institute for ASEAN
and East Asia’ (ERIA) outlook in Chapters  and , this section describes two
cases, Case  (Power Development Plan [PDP]) and Case  (ERIA_BAU), for the
targets by 2030 in regard to power generation calculated using the power
generation capacity and several conditions, such as the capacity factor and the
loss of transmission and distribution lines Case  focuses on the relationship
between the existing PDP of the MME and forecasted demand (outlook by ERIA) Case
is an aggressive pattern that includes the maximal use of solar/wind and biomass
power and mainly hydro potential, which is estimated at about 10,000 megawatts
(MW) by the hydroelectricity department of the MME Table  presents the revised
capacity in the aggressive case (Case ) In this case, hydro, biomass, and
solar/wind capacity will increase by approximately 350 MW/year (,526 MW years),
30 MW/year (301 MW years), and 36 MW/year (368 MW years), respectively, compared
with Case  from 2021 to In order to achieve the best mix in 2030, the coal/gas
capacity will decrease by approximately 130 MW/year (–,317 MW) compared to Case
from 2021 to 17 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Table  Power Generation Development
Plan No Project name Type Capacity (MW) Year Company CIIDG ERDOS HONGJUN
Electric Power Co, Ltd  Coal Power Plant - Coal 135 2017  Sesan II lower Hydro
400 Hydro Power Lower Se San  Co, Ltd 2018  Coal Power Plant Coal 135 Cambodia
Energy Limited (CEL II) 2019 Cambodia International Investment Development Group
(CIIDG)  Coal Power Plant II- Coal  2020 Cambodia International Investment
Development Group (CIIDG)  Coal Power Plant II- Coal  2021  Coal Power Plant
IIII- Coal 350 Royal Group Co, Ltd 2022  Stung Sala mum Thun Hydro 70 2022 China
Huadian Lower Stung Russey Chrum Hydro-Electric Project (Cambodia) Co, Ltd
Middle Stung Russey Chrum  Hydro 70 2022  Veal thmor kambot Hydro 100 2022 10
Prek Liang Hydro 120 Asia Ecoenergy Development Ltd 2022 11 Coal Power Plant
IIII- Coal 350 Royal Group Co, Ltd 2023 12 Stung Battambang II Hydro 36 Stung
Battambang II Hydro Power Plant 2023 13 Stung Pursat  Hydro 40 Stung Pursat
Hydro Power Plant 2023 14 Sambor (Step ) Hydro 600 Sambor Hydro Power Plant 2025
15 Sambor (Step ) Hydro 600 Sambor Hydro Power Plant 2026 16 Coal Power Plant
Coal 300 2026 17 Sambor (Step ) Hydro 600 Sambor Hydro Power Plant 2027 18 Coal
Power Plant VI Coal 300 2027 19 Coal Power Plant VII Coal 300 2028 20 Coal Power
Plant VIII Coal 300 2029 21 Lower Sesan  Hydro 96 2029 22 Coal Power Plant VIIII
Coal 300 2030 Total Capacity in 2030 - Coal/gas: ,373 MW - Oil: 251 MW - Hydro:
,602 MW - Biomass: 185 MW - Solar/wind: 305 MW Source: Electricite Du Cambodge
(2016) Table  Aggressive Generation Development Plan (revised existing plan) No
Type Capacity (MW) Year Total in 2030 (MW)  Coal/gas -,317 2021–2030: /10 years
,056  Hydro +,526 2021–2030: /10 years ,127  Biomass +301 2031–2030: /10 years
486  Solar/wind +368 2031–2030: /10 years 673 Source: Author (outcome of the
dialogue with the Ministry of Mines and Energy) 18 Case descriptions Common
condition: Case  and Case  • Demand is the same as in the outlook by ERIA (Table
) • Supply (including loss) + import = demand (outlook by ERIA) • Import: The
constant amount of electricity imported from 2020 to 2030 (Table ) Demand =
national capacity + electricity imported • Oil: Gradually reduced high cost as
an impact of no oil use from 2020 Case : Existing PDP (2017–2030) • Capacity:
Planned capacity mentioned in the power generation development plan, covering
the years from 2017 to 2030 (Table ) • Loss: 10% of the total national power
supply is transmission and distribution losses • Capacity factor: Coal/gas
(85%), oil (85%), hydro (35%), biomass (40%), solar (15%), wind (20%) The
capacity factor of hydro plants in the dry season is 35% In order to ensure
essential power generation, the percentage is completely used in the whole year
• Required import supply: Calculated according to demand – supply  negative
value for imports reflects an excess of electricity power supply in  year and
encourages electricity exports or  reduction of electricity generation, while
positive value of imports reflects the need for imported electricity Table  and
Figure  show the power generation capacity in Case  Referring to the existing
plan by 2030,  lack of peak capacity will occur in 2030 and peak with  +20%
margin in 2030 using estimated data on 2020 and 2025 using the linear
extrapolation method Therefore, this case roughly indicates the capacity needed
by 2030 if the current plan is implemented by Imported electricity is not
included in this data, but it is surely an aspect to be considered in the power
supply calculation Table  Power Generation Capacity in Case  Capacity (MW)\year
2020 2025 2030 Coal/gas 873 ,773 ,373 Oil 251 251 251 Hydro ,330 ,506 ,602
Renewable energy (biomass, solar, wind) 72 281 490 Total capacity ,526 ,811 ,716
Peak demand +20% margin ,017 ,214 ,776 Required capacity   60 Source:
Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) 19 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure  Power
Generation Capacity in Case  ,000 Peak demand + 20% margin Renewable energy: 490
MW ,000 ,000 Hydro: ,602 MW Peak demand + 20% margin         ,000 Peak Oil: 251
MW ,000 Coal/gas ,373 MW ,000 - 2020 2025 2030 Coal/gas Oil Hydro Biomass
Solar/wind Required capacity Source: Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) Case :
Recommended pattern • Power supply: The total amount of the power supply is the
same as in the current generation development plan from 2017 to • Additional
capacity (2021 to 2030): Consider only hydro and renewable energy (RE) (biomass,
solar/wind) in terms of reducing the use of fossil fuels • Loss: 10% of the
total national power supply is transmission and distribution losses • Capacity
factor: Coal/gas (85%), oil (85%), hydro (35%), biomass (40%), solar (15%), wind
(20%) The capacity factor of hydro plants in the dry season is 35% In order to
ensure essential power generation, the percentage is completely used in  whole
year • Required import supply: Calculated according to demand – supply  negative
value for imports reflects an excess of electricity power supply in  year and
encourages electricity exports or  reduction of electricity generation, while
positive value of imports reflects the need for imported electricity • Oil:
Gradually reduced as an impact of no oil use from • Import: Gradually reduced as
an impact of no imports from 20 Table  and Figure  show the power generation
capacity in Case  Since constructing new generation capacity requires time, this
case only considers additional hydro and RE capacity from 2021 and 2030,
respectively These capacities are also presented in Table  The total capacity of
the current PDP is ,716 MW in 2030, but the total capacity of the revised plan
is ,081 MW due to  difference in the capacity factor between coal/gas (85%) and
hydro (35%) Therefore, if the energy mix is prioritised towards hydro and RE,
increased total capacity will be required In this case, the total capacity is
over the peak demand with  +20% margin each year without electricity imports The
figure shows there will be capacity access shown above the dotted line for peak
demand with  +20% margin, which benefits operators by having the best-chosen
electricity resource, resulting in some long-term economic advantages such as
affordable electricity prices, sustainable supply, and high security To attain
these advantages, Cambodia must consider not only power capacity planning but
also transmission and distribution planning throughout the country In the case
of electricity exports, enhancement of the interconnection plan is needed Table
Generation Capacity in Case  Capacity (MW)\year 2020 2025 2030 Coal/gas 873 ,230
,230 Oil 251   Hydro ,330 ,012 ,694 Renewable energy (biomass)  243 485
Renewable energy (solar/wind) 72 372 672 Total capacity ,526 ,856 ,081 Peak
demand +20% margin ,017 ,214 ,776 Required capacity    Source: Author (outcome
of the dialogue with the Ministry of Mines and Energy) 21 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY
PLAN Figure  Power Generation Capacity in Case  ,000 ,000 RE: 711 MW ,000 Hydro:
,092 MW ,000         RE:  Peak demand + 20% 11 MW ,000 Peak ,000 ,000 ,000
Coal/Gas: ,230 - 2020 2025 2030 Coal/gas Oil Hydro (PDB) Add hydro Add
solar/wind (PBD) Biomass (PBD) Solar/wind (PBD) Add biomass (PBD) RE = renewable
energy Source: Author (outcome of the dialogue with the Ministry of Mines and
Energy) We consider the energy mix based on the above conditions Table  shows
the summarised pattern of the power generation plan by Demand uses the basic
plan from the outlook by ERIA as  reference Figure () shows the power supply mix
and electricity demand in Case  for the current existing plan The dependency on
fossil fuels will increase towards 2030 due to the massive use of coal/gas power
plants The percentage in the energy mix will be 68% in To reach the power demand
of terawatt hours (TWh) using  controllable supply consisting of coal/gas,
hydro, and RE, this percentage will increase to  minimum of 70%, which is also
high percentage for fossil fuel dependency Therefore, the current plan by 2030
has high potential fossil fuel dependency as fossil fuels are  major energy
source in the world today On the other hand, the overconsumption of fossil fuels
can lead to serious environmental issues such as air pollution and global
warming What is more, as this resource is limited, prices will possibly change
drastically Hence, the higher dependency on fossil fuels will result in higher
potential risk 22 Based on Case , we consider  recommended Basic Energy Plan for
Cambodia (BEPC) pattern for Case  Figure () shows the power supply mix in Case
The total supply is the same as in Case  (TWh) In order to reduce fossil fuel
dependency, hydro and RE capacity are increased In 2030, the energy mix of
fossil fuels will be 35% Table  Summarised Pattern of the Power Generation Plan
Year 2020 2025 2030 Case Demand (TWh), BAU outlook by ERIA Planned power supply
(TWh) & loss (10%) (TWh) - - - Available power supply (TWh) Required import
supply (TWh) (demand – available supply)  - - Case1 Existing plan (2017–2030)
Energy mix (%) at  maximum - Coal/gas - Oil   - Hydro - RE (biomass)    - RE
(solar, wind)    Estimated power supply (TWh) & loss (10%) (TWh)  - - Available
power supply (TWh) Required import supply (TWh) (demand – supply)  - - Case
Aggressive pattern (reduce imports, improve hydro and RE) Energy mix (%) at
maximum - Coal/gas - Oil    - Hydro - RE (biomass)    - RE (solar, wind)    BAU
= business as usual, RE = renewable energy, & = transmission and distribution,
TWh = terrawatt hour Source: Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) 23 CAMBODIA BASIC
ENERGY PLAN Figure  Power Development Plan and Basic Energy Plan for Cambodia in
2030 ,000 40 Total capacity ,716MW ,000 35 Total supply TWh Demand TWh ,000 30 )
(                )   13% Solar/wind  & loss: 10% ( ,000 25 % Biomass
Wind Solar Biomass 19% Hydro % Solar/wind ,000 20  % Biomass % Oil Hydro 22%
Hydro ,000 15  WH Oil ,000 10 68% Coal/gas Coal/gas 70% Coal/gas ,000
Coal/gas Oil Hydro Biomass Solar/wind Wind () Case : Power Development Plan in
2030 ,000 40 Total capacity ,081MW Wind 35 ,000 Solar Total supply TWh Demand
TWh Biomass 30 ,000 % Solar/wind )    (                25 ,000 & loss: 10% %
Biomass )    ( % Solar/wind 20 ,000         % Biomass Hydro 55% Hydro 15 ,000
WH 66% Hydro 10 ,000  ,000 35 % Coal/gas Coal/gas 22% Coal/gas   Coal/gas Oil
Hydro Biomass Solar Wind () Case : Basic Energy Plan for Cambodia in 2030 MW =
megawatt, & = transmission and distribution, TWh = terrawatt hour Source:
Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) and author (outcome of the dialogue with the
Ministry of Mines and Energy) 24 The reasons for the additional hydropower plant
capacity are the following: • To minimise the potential risk from the coal price
• To improve energy security • To reduce the environmental impacts (air
pollution, global warming) Figure  shows the levelised cost of electricity
(LCOE) for generating plants in 14 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) countries plus Brazil, China, and South Africa The LCOE of
coal is relatively lower than for hydropower plants However, the LCOE of hydro
varies widely between US$15/MWh and US$388/ MWh as the LCOE of hydropower is
strongly correlated with the investment cost (Figure ) Figure  shows the LCOE
component ratios of coal and hydro The LCOE for hydro contains an 85% investment
cost On the other hand, the LCOE component ratios for coal are 28% investment
costs, 35% fuel costs, 27% carbon costs, and 10% operation and maintenance costs
Therefore, there is  possibility that the LCOE costs will be higher than for
hydro due to an increase in the imported coal price in the future Figure  shows
the historical coal price change from 1998 to 2008 in the US, Japan, and
northwest Europe The annual coal prices in 2008 increased drastically by about –
times from Where profitability is defined as revenues minus long-run operating
costs, the Carbon Tracker Initiative’ analysis finds that due to high fuel
costs, 42% of coal capacity operating today could be losing money in the world
Therefore, the higher dependency on fossil fuels, in this case coal, resulted in
higher risk potential, including the electricity price Figure  Levelised Cost of
Electricity of Coal and Hydro in 2015 Coal (SC) Potential risk Coal (PC) Coal
(USC) Hydro (run -of-river) Hydro (reservoir)  100 200 300 400 500 LCOE
(US$/MWh) LCOE = levelised cost of electricity, SC = supercritical coal-ﬁred, PC
= pulverised coal-ﬁred, USC = ultra-supercritical coal-ﬁred Note: Includes 14
OECD countries (Austria, Belgium, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, the United
Kingdom, and the United States) and three non-OECD countries (Brazil, China, and
South Africa) Source: IEA, NEA, and OECD (2015),    25 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY
PLAN Figure  Comparison of the Levelised Cost of Electricity with the Investment
Cost (hydro) 160 140 120 )    / $   (     100 80 60 40 20   50 100 150 200 250
300 350 450 Investment cost (US$/MWh) LCOE = levelised cost of electricity, MWh
= megawatt hour Source: IEA, NEA, and OECD (2015),  Figure  Levelised Cost of
Electricity Component Ratios for Coal and Hydro in 2015 LCOE component ratio
(hydro) LCOE same ratio (coal) Refurbishment and decommissioning cost % Carbon
cost % Carbon cost % & cost 28% & cost 15% Carbon cost 27% Investment cost 85%
Investment cost 85% Fuel cost 35% Refurbishment and decommissioning cost % ()
Hydro () Coal LCOE = levelised cost of electricity, & = operation and
maintenance Source: IEA, NEA, and OECD (2015),  26 Figure  Historical Coal Price
Change from 1998 to 2008 160 140 Northwest Europe 120 , )      / $   (      100
US     80          60 40 Japan Coal price 20 × - × / 10years  1998 1999 2000
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Source: Breeze,  (2010),  Cambodia
relies on imported fossil fuels, including coal The lack of energy security is
linked to the negative economic and social impacts of either the physical
unavailability of energy or prices that are not competitive or are overly
volatile Details on energy security are described in Chapter  The conventional
coal-fired plants generally used in Cambodia generate some significant
disadvantages, including greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, mining destruction, the
generation of millions of tonnes of waste, and the emission of harmful
substances The greater the number of constructed conventional coal-fired plants,
the greater the negative impact on the environment GHG emissions are the result
of harmful waste from the combustion of coal, which causes pollution and
contributes to global warming The increase in carbon emissions by coal-fired
plants has led to further global warming, which has an impact on climate change
Thermal plants like coal-fired plants emit harmful substances into the
environment These include mercury, sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide, mercury,
selenium, and arsenic These harmful substances not only cause acid rain but are
also very harmful to humans To mitigate the situation, clean coal technology,
such as ultra-supercritical (USC), integrated gasification combined cycle
(IGCC), and carbon capture and storage (CCS), will be needed when Cambodia plans
new coal power plants 27 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN The targets by 2030 are
summarised as follows Targets by 2030 • Basic energy mix: Coal/gas (35%), hydro
(55%), RE (biomass, solar, and wind) (10%) • Export electricity to neighbouring
country • Improve the utilisation of diverse energy sources  Necessary action
plans and policies The necessary action plans and policies to reach the targets
by 2030 are described here To achieve the targets by 2030, additional capacity
is required of approximately ,000 MW by hydro plants, 300 MW by biomass plants,
and 400 MW by solar/wind plants by However, there will be several challenges in
implementation due to the high initial costs, the balance of the environment,
and the significant impact of the dry season In consideration of these
challenges, the ‘best energy mix’ is an alternative solution To achieve the
target of the best energy mix, the following are necessary: • Massive
utilisation of hydro and RE potential • Application of clean coal technology
(USC, IGCC, CCS) • Conducting power trading (exports and imports) through the
GMS and the ASEAN Power Grid (APG) • Utilisation of domestic gas potential
According to the necessary action plans and policies, it is recommended that the
electricity of the BEPC be reviewed on  routine basis (every – years) The
electricity of the BEPC with the best energy mix should be modified as needed
Transmission The national grid consists of three main components: high voltage
(HV) substations, HV transmission lines, and the dispatching centre The
development of the national grid has three main objectives: () provide the
opportunity to develop and integrate all power sources in the country into one
grid system, (ii) expand the substations and transmission lines to provide
electricity to cities and provinces throughout the country, and (iii) manage and
control the operation of power sources to provide electricity to all areas
efficiently, sustainably, and safely The goal of national grid development by
2020 is shown in Figure  The national transmission master plan of 2016 is
presented in Tables  to  28 Figure  Goal of National Grid Development by 2020
Lao PDR Thailand Solar power plant Biomass power plant Fuel-ﬁred power plant
Coal-ﬁred power plant Hydropower plant in operation and under construction
Substation in operation, under construction and plan to construct Transmission
line 115-230kV under construction and plan to construct Transmission line 500kV
under construction and plan to construct Transmission line 115-230kV in
operation Viet Nam Source: Electricity Authority of Cambodia () Table  National
Transmission Master Plan (115 kV) No 115 kV transmission line Length (km) Year
Development partner  GS2 – GS Hunsen Park and Grid Substation  2017 BT  GS7
(SPP) – GS Prey Veng – GS Bavet 160 2017 CEIB  Laos Border to GS Preah Vihear 60
2017 CEIB  GS Battambong – GS Pailin 80 2017 EDC  GS3 – GS Toul Kork  2017 EDC
Remain from Phnom Penh Loop Line project (CEIB)  GS5 – GS Chroy Changvar 18 2017
GS Kampong Cham – GS Praek Prosab (Kratie) 91 2018 AFD  GS Svay Antor – GS Prey
Veng 46 2018 CEIB  GS Preah Sihanouk – GS Ream 12 2018 CEIB 10 GS Ream – GS
Chamkar Loung 60 2018 LDP 11 GS Chamkar Loung – Kiriom III Hydro Power 27 2018
LDP 12 GS Kampong Thom – GS Preah Vihear 140 2018 CEIB 13 GS Krolanh – GS Oddar
Meanchey 80 2018 LDP Underground Line from GS1 – GS EDC HQ – Stadium – NCC – GS3
14 14 2019 JICA Phase  15 GS Praek Prosab – GS Kratie 30 2021 LDP Total 828 km
AFD = Agence Française de Développement, BT = build and transfer, CEIB =
Cambodian Export-Import Bank, EDC = Electricite du Cambodge, JICA = Japan
International Cooperation Agency, LDP = looking for development partner Source:
Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) 29 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Table  National
Transmission Master Plan (230 kV) No 230 kV transmission line Length (km) Year
Development partner  GS Kampong Cham – GS Kratie 125 2017 BOT  GS Kratie – GS
Stung Treng 115 2017 IEB  GS Stung Treng – Lwer Sesan II 26 2017 BOT GS
Battambang – East Siem Reap – Kampong Thom – Kampong Cham  350 2018 CEIB Phnom
Penh Loop Line Phase  (NPP – Chroy Changvar – EPP - NPP)  96 2018 CEIB  Tatay
Hydropower – Phnom Penh 182 2018 BOT  GS Koh Kong – GS Koh Kong City 20 2018 AFD
GS Chamkar Loung – GS Botumsakor 54 2018 AFD  GS Botumsakor – Tatay Hydropower
70 2018 LDP 10 GS Kratie – GS Mondulkiri 170 2019 CEIB 11 GS Ratanakiri – GS
Stung Treng 120 2019 CEIB 12 GS Stung Treng – Laos Border 48 2019 LDP 13 GS Beak
Chan – GS5 – NCC 20 2020 JICA Phase II 14 GS Tropang Prasat – GS Siem Reap 30
2021 BOT GS Tropang Prasat – GS Siem Reap ,426 km BOT = build, operate, and
transfer, IEB = India Exim Bank Source: Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) Table
National Transmission Master Plan (500 kV) No 500 kV transmission line Length
(km) Year Development partner  Phnom Penh – Preah Sihanouk 198 2019 BOT  Phnom
Penh – Soung 96 2021 LDP  Soung – Sambo – Stung Treng - 2025 LDP Total 294 km
Source: Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) 30  Targets by 2030  National grid
expansion The HV transmission system, , the ‘national grid’, will gradually
establish grid substations in each district to provide outlets for supplying
electricity from the national grid The grid substations are to be located in the
central area of each province to facilitate the development of  sub-transmission
system to transmit electricity from the national grid to rural areas The
projects for the expansion of the electricity supply from the national grid and
from networks importing electricity from neighbouring countries to the rural
areas are to be implemented as the first priority, as they will provide  higher
quality and less expensive electricity supply compared to the supply from the
existing diesel generators On the other hand, sudden expansion of the power
transmission and distribution network may easily cause electricity shortages for
the entire national grid, especially in the dry season This naturally requires
secure, continuous supply The current choice in which the power source
completely depends on IPP and imports is not necessarily the only way to avoid
an intermittent electricity supply from the energy security point of view, yet
it should be one of the effective options in the process of promoting
electrification From the above, the direction to preferentially consolidate the
transmission and distribution network can be regarded as reasonable
Interconnection line with neighbouring countries In 2016, Cambodia connected
regional countries via several transmission lines The importing of electricity
from Thailand, Viet Nam, and the Lao PDR started at the end of 2007, in 2009,
and 2010, respectively Electric power between Cambodia and Thailand is
transmitted at the 115 kV and 22 kV levels The 115 kV transmission line from
Aranya Prathet substation, connecting Thailand to Banteay Meanchey, Battambang,
and Siem Reap, was commissioned in An agreement was signed with Trat Province
(Thailand) to supply power to Koh Kong Province and Poi Pet via the 22 kV line
EDC imported power from Viet Nam via  230 kV transmission line to supply Phnom
Den, Takeo Province, and Phnom Penh in March Since 2002, EDC has imported power
from PC2 (Viet Nam) to supply power to Memut and Pnhea Krek Districts of Kampong
Cham Province, Bavet in Svay Rieng Province, Kampong Trach in Kampot Province,
Koh Thom and Chrey Thom in Kandal Province, Snuol District in Kratie Province,
Keo Seima District in Mondulkiri   31 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Province, and
Kompong Ro in Svay Rieng Province The 22 kV interconnection line from the Lao
PDR to Stung Treng was charged in In 2015,  new interconnection point from
Champasak Province, Ban Hat Substation, Lao PDR, to Kampong Sralu, Preah Vihear
Province, Cambodia, was created and the initial design and construction for the
115 kV transmission line was energised at the 22 kV voltage level for the first
stage until the transmission line from the Lao PDR border to Chey Sen Substation
was completed Figure  shows the areas of electricity imports from neighbouring
countries Each connection between countries has  different grid standard
(voltage control or frequency control, etc) due to the different demand in each
area Therefore, to connect to the national grid and start multilateral trading,
harmonisation of the grid standard is needed Figure  Power Installed in
Provinces via Several Voltage Interconnections from Neighbouring Countries 22
115 230 Source: Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) and Electiricty Authority of
Cambodia (EAC) (2017) In order to achieve affordable electricity and to ensure
regional energy security by promoting the efficient utilisation of resources in
the future, it is recommended to conduct not only bilateral trading but also
multilateral trading amongst GMS and ASEAN countries In the case of Cambodia,
although improving the national grid connection, transmission capacity, and
interconnection capacity are prioritised projects, Cambodia should conduct
study and trading trial for exporting electricity to neighbouring countries in
parallel way This would improve connections to the national grid and improve
access to energy services in the region 32  Transmission and distribution loss
Figure 10 shows the transmission and distribution loss from 2013 to 2016 for
Viet Nam as  reference The whole country received electricity not only from EDC
but also another rural electricity enterprise (REE) distributor Based on this
figure, the transmission loss of the whole country was higher than for EDC If
the whole country can connect to the EDC grid in the future, the difference in
the loss between the two lines in the graph will be reduced to the loss by EDC
Figure 10 Transmission and Distribution Loss, 2013–2016 16,% 14,% 13,% 14,%
Cambodia 12,% ) % (    11,% 11,% 12, %  10,% EDC 10,%
10,% ,% Viet Nam ,60% ,49% ,87% ,% ,57% ,% ,% ,% ,% 2013 2014 2015 2016 EDC =
Electricite du Cambodge Source: Electricite Du Cambodge (2016) and EVN (2017a)
Figure 11 shows the distribution losses from 2014 to higher bar represents
purchased energy, while  lower one represents sold energy The decreasing line is
the distribution losses in total by year At the end of 2016, the Cambodia system
distribution loss was %, which was higher than the distribution loss for Viet
Nam (% in 2014, falling in 2016 as an assumption) Therefore, improvement in the
quality of electricity (stable voltage level and frequency) through distribution
network development is needed for the distribution loss to decrease to be the
same as the percentages in neighbouring countries The distribution loss
percentage decreased by %–% per year from 2014 to Reducing the loss requires
more efforts Hence, we assume the decreasing percentage is % per year until 2030
towards % distribution losses in  33 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure 11
Distribution Losses Electricity generated, purchased ,000 20% Electricity sold
to licensees and consumers 18%           ,000 16% ) % ( ,000 14%
∆%-%/year )    (  12%              ,000 Distribution loss % 10%          ,000  %
∆%/year ,                    % % ,000 Distribution loss % (Viet Nam) % ,000 %  %
Source: Author (outcome of the dialogue with the Ministry of Mines and Energy);
Electiricty Authority of Cambodia (EAC) (2017); and Asian Development Bank (ADB)
(2016) To improve the distribution losses, the development of distribution
lines, maintenance of infrastructure, and standards for distribution equipment
are necessary Table  shows the distribution network support projects until In
2012, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) supported the improvement of the
electrification rate in some provinces, and today, the Japan International
Cooperation Agency (JICA) currently supports the Phnom Penh distribution system
until It is recommended to continue long-term relationships with external
support and the development of guidelines for maintaining distribution quality
Table  Distribution Network Support Projects Year Project Province Development
partner 2014 Rural Energy Project Svay Reing ADB Second Power Transmission and
Distribution Project ADB (31%) JICA (43%) EDC (21%) Shihanoukville Kampot 2016
Medium-Voltage Sub- transmission Expansion Sector Project Kampong Thom Kampong
Cham Siem Reap ADB 2018 Transmission and Distribution System Expansion Project
(Phase ) Phnom Penh JICA 2020 ADB = Asian Development Bank, EDC = Electricite du
Cambodge, JICA = Japan International Cooperation Agency Source: Kingdom of
Cambodia (2014) 34  System Average Interruption Duration Index and Frequency
Index The System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) and the System
Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI) are commonly used indicators for
monitoring the reliability of distribution systems and the actual situation of
the stable power supply at affordable prices It is recommended to improve the
reliability of power statistics by decreasing the number of minutes and times by
years represented in the SAIDI and SAIFI Figure 12 and Figure 13 show the
progress of the SAIDI and SAIFI from 2012 to 2016, with Viet Nam in 2017 as
reference The SAIDI and SAIFI decreased from 2012 through increasing electricity
capacity The SAIDI decreased by % and the SAIFI decreased by % from 2015 to If
the SAIDI and SAIFI are planned to decrease by the same percentages, % per year
and % per year from 2016 to 2030, there would be  high possibility of achieving
less than 620 minutes for the SAIDI and less than  times for the SAIFI in As
further improvement, it is suggested to ameliorate the reliability of the
transmission system, such as by improving the relay system, expanding
transmission lines, and establishing new grid substations Figure 12 System
Average Interruption Duration Index (minutes) 10,000 )       ,000  ,000 (
,000 ,000 ∆75% ,000 ,000 ∆27% ∆% ,000 ,000 ∆%/year 620 ,000  2012 2014 2016 2018
2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 Cambodia Thailand Viet Nam Source: Electricity
Generating Authority of Thailand (EGAT) (2017); EVN (2017a); and Kingdom of
Cambodia (2012)   35 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure 13 System Average
Interruption Frequency Index (times) 120 )    ∆%   (
100 80 ∆78% 60 ∆11% 40 ∆% 18, 20 ∆%/year , ,19  2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022
2024 2026 2028 2030 Cambodia Thailand Viet Nam Source: Electricity Generating
Authority of Thailand (EGAT) (2017); EVN (2017a) and Kingdom of Cambodia (2012)
Household electrification rate and national grid quality On 30 November 2011,
the Government of Cambodia issued the Strategy and Plan for Development of Rural
Electrification in the Kingdom of Cambodia (SPDR),  specific strategy and plan
to achieve essential targets for rural electrification as prakas (ministry
ordinance) This plan was discussed by the Ministry of Mine and Energy (MME),
Electricity Authority of Cambodia (EAC), Rural Electrification Fund (REF), and
Electricite du Cambodge (EDC) based on the results obtained through cooperation
with international organisations and set up as the national goal according to
the SPDRE Under the plan, each organisation is supposed to take action for the
targets below: • Village areas: Achieve an electrification rate of 100%,
including battery illumination, by Household electrification: Achieve an
electrification rate of at least 70% connection to the national grid by •
Regarding the grid extension, which is the best method for electrification, 80%
and 95% of all villages will receive electricity supply from the national grid
or from neighbouring countries by 2020 and 2030, respectively, if the government
receives funding support to extend the grid The target is for 70% of households
to connect to the national grid by 36 Figure 14 shows the progress of household
electrification until , Compared with the target for 2030, which is 70%
electrified households, household electrification in 2018 is 81% In other words,
the percentage for 2018 is beyond the target of 70% in The national grid
connection is associated with affordable prices, sustainable supply, and high
security Thus, the target by 2030 should be re-planned to reach over 70% The new
target was set in our meeting with the MME, which is 95% in Figure 14 Number of
Households and the Electriﬁcation Rate Target (Lao PDR): 98% 100% , 90% )
Target: 95% ,     81%  80% ( Target: 70%                                70% ,
% 68,% 60% 58,% ,  50%  49,% 42,% 40% , 38,% 32,%  30% 26,% , 22,% 20% 18,%
10% , % ,
Total households (million) # of household connections (million) of household
connections % Source: Author (outcome of the dialogue with the Ministry of Mines
and Energy); Killeen,  (2013); and EAC’ Consolidated report for year The targets
by 2030 are summarised below Targets by 2030 • Transmission and distribution
loss: less than % • SAIDI, SAIFI: Less than 620 minutes and  times, respectively
• Household electrification rate: Change from 70% to 95% of households connected
to the national grid     37 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN  Necessary action plans
and policies In order to reach the targets by 2030, the following action plans
and policies are necessary Achieve less than % transmission and distribution
losses To reduce transmission and distribution losses, establishing equipment
standards, changing to higher voltage transmission lines, and utilising
materials that cut heat loss are recommended  500 kV transmission line will be
constructed from 2019 to 2025, which will contribute to reducing transmission
losses • Action : Establish equipment standards • Action : Change to  higher
voltage transmission line • Action : Utilise materials for cutting heat loss
Achieve less than 620 minutes for the SAIDI and  times for the SAIFI To improve
the SAIDI and SAIFI, we recommend ameliorating the reliability of the
transmission system, such as improving the relay system, expanding transmission
lines, and establishing new grid substations • Action : Build-up the
transmission and substation systems (, indoor transmission, two lines/loop
connection) • Action : Adopt supervisory control and data acquisition and
distribution management systems • Action : Use underground electric cables
Achieve 95% of households connected to the national grid To achieve the recent
target for household electrification of 95% of households being connected to the
national grid by 2030, continuing national grid expansion and conducting
national grid expansion study, including on grid reliability and multilateral
trading amongst neighbouring countries, are needed The current national
transmission master plan will be finalised by 2021 or • Action : Continue the
national grid expansion • Action : Update the current national transmission
master plan, considering grid reliability and multilateral trading amongst
neighbouring countries 38  Roadmap For the necessary action plans and policies,
the recommended roadmap is as follows Short term, 2019–2022: • Establish
equipment standards for the transmission and distribution networks with
implementation of the national transmission master plan • Study improvements in
transmission and distribution losses, SAIDI, and SAIFI • Set  new target of
national grid electrified households Medium term, 2023–2026: • Continue
implementation of the national transmission master plan • Consider
implementation of  study (transmission and distribution losses, SAIDI, and
SAIFI) • Develop and maintain standardised substations and distribution lines in
each province Long term, 2027–2030: • Grid guidelines by the MME for maintaining
the quality of electricity • Set the next goals for achieving further benefits
from electricity  Distribution and tariffs The Cambodian government’ plan will
ensure all villagers will have access to electricity by The growth in
distribution network development and village electrification is shown in Figure
15, which presents the shares of grid connections and dispersed power sources
The vertical lines show the share of licenced zones as  bar graph and the share
of electrified villages as  line graph In the last 10 years, electrified zones
increased significantly In 2017, the percentage of achieved electrification
licenced zones was % and the electrified villages rate was % According to
government plans, the target for the electrified villages rate is 100% in The
distribution of licenced zones granted and the megavolt (MV) backbone of
electrical energy supply system constructed by the end of 2016 are shown in
Figure In 2016, Cambodia reported that 58% (11,558) of villages in the country
had access to electricity via the distribution network in operation, and 85%
(,245) of villages were related to the distribution network Looking at the
remaining electrification area, 37% (336) of villages live without the benefit
of electricity     39 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure 15 Progress of
Distribution Network Development and Village Electriﬁcation 97,% 100% 95,%
Target: 100% (2020) (not only grid connection) 97,% 90% 84,% 79,% 81,%     80%
72,%    74,%             %              70% 66,% 61,% 60% 60,%  51,% 47,% 50%
49,% 41,% 40% 34,% 30%     % 20% 10%
% of licenced zone % of electriﬁed villages Source: Author (outcome of the
dialogue with the Ministry of Mines and Energy) and EAC’ Consolidated report for
year Figure 16 Distribution of Licenced Zones and the State of Electriﬁcation at
the End of 2016 Distribution of licenced zones granted and MV backbone
constructed for year-end 2016 Situation of electriﬁcation in Cambodia (city +
rural as of December 2016) Thailand Remaining villages ,% 336 villages Lao PDR
,245 villlages 11,558 villages Viet Nam Distribution network in operation 81,58%
Distribution network to be constructed soon 15,85% Licenced zone granted MV
backbone constructed Licenced zone granted 97,63% MV = megavolt Source: EAC’
consolidated report for year 40  Targets by 2030 To achieve the targets of the
basic energy plan by 2030 of affordability, sustainability, and security, the
content should consider not only expanding electrification but also electricity
tariffs, especially in rural areas Cambodia’ electricity tariffs are higher than
in neighbouring countries, and electricity tariffs in rural areas are higher
than in urban areas due to the dependency on high-cost generation, such as small
generation systems running on imported diesel fuel, high distribution network
power losses, and the lack of subsidies  Tariff differences between urban and
rural areas Figure 17 shows all administration, commercial, and industrial
consumer tariff differences for villages covered by electricity licenced areas10
These tariffs decrease when the covered villages are over 50% The cost of
electricity from own generation, purchases from IPP, and purchases from
neighbouring countries or other licensees are the largest components of the cost
of electric supply by licensees to the consumers Hence, the tariffs for
electricity depend on the cost of the electricity generated or purchased With
the development of  grid system, the tariffs of licensees purchasing electricity
from the grid have become stable Therefore, the higher percentage of villages
covered, the lower the applied tariffs The tariff differences are 03 times for
the yellow line and 22 times for the remaining lines In association with the
graph, the tariffs also depend on the electricity sources purchased or utilised
by licensees For instance, if diesel/heavy fuel oil (HFO) is utilised, the
tariff will be calculated based on it Generally, diesel costs are higher than
other sources and, eventually, the grid connection must be considered from the
cost perspective 10 ‘Salient Features of Power Development in Kingdom of
Cambodia’, EAC’ Consolidated Report for 41 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure 17
Difference in Tariffs by Percentage of Villages Covered by Electricity Licenced
Areas ,238 ,238 ,24 ,23 ,225 ,225 ,22 ,213 ,213 )   ,21  / $   ( ff     ,195 ,20
,195 ,19 ,184 ,184 ,18 ,175 ,175 ,173 ,173 ,168 ,168 ,17 ,16 20% 30% 100% 40%
50% 60% 70% 80% 90% Small consumers at low voltage, consumers paying using
government budget, and foreigners’ residences Medium-sized consumers at low
voltage meter on EDC’ transformer Medium-sized consumers with meter at low
voltage of consumer’ transformer Big consumers at medium voltage meter Source:
EAC’ Consolidated report for year 2017 and Electiricty Authority of Cambodia
(EAC) (2017)  Times of use for tariffs From the above reasonable facts, Cambodia
is trying to reduce electricity tariffs In accordance with the Ministry of Mine
and Energy’ Prakas (regulation) No 0094 dated 24 February 2015, the government
set out  tariff reduction plan for electric power from the national grid for
2015–Figure 18 shows the plan for household tariff reductions from 2015 to 2020
with neighbouring countries as references11,12,13 In 2015, the rural and urban
area tariffs for electricity usage <10 kWh/month were US$205/ kWh and
US$1525/kWh, respectively The purchase-type tariffs of <10 kWh/month and 11–50
kWh/month had the largest tariff gaps between the rural and urban areas in In
this case, the purchase type >201 kWh/month had no gap between these two areas
According to the reduction plan, such gap is expected to decrease drastically in
2020, with the purchase type <10kWh/month The subsidised price for only small-
type purchases is included in the electricity tariff of neighbouring countries
(Thailand, less than 90 kWh/month; Viet Nam, less than 50 kWh/month)14,15,16
Despite the plan to decrease 11 12 13 14 15 16       42 the tariff for rural
areas in 2020 for all purchase types, the tariff is still higher than the tariff
in neighbouring countries For increasing the priority of defraying rural area
electricity costs, it is recommended to conduct cross-subsidies between high and
low electricity consumption Figure 18 Electricity Tariff Differences for
Households ,30 No subsidy comparison ,25                   , , , , , ,   ,    ,
,  ,20   ,    ,    ,    ,    ,  )    / $   ( ff                 ,    ,    ,    ,
,  ,15   ,    ,    ,    ,    ,    ,    ,     ,10 ,        ,          , , , ,
, , ,05 , ,00 <10kWh/month  kWh/month 51 -100 kWh/month 101 - 200 kWh/month >201
kWh/month Type of purchase (residents) Urban area, 2015 Urban area, 2020 Rural
area, 2015 Rural area, 2020 Viet Nam, 2017 Lao PDR, 2017 Thailand, 2018 Source:
EAC’ consolidated report for year 2017; EVN (2017b); PolicyAsiapaciﬁcenergy ();
and Thailand Board of Investment () At its 267th Session, held on 28 August
2014, the EAC approved  time-of-use (TOU) tariff for MV consumers of the EDC
supply The TOU tariff approved is shown in Table The TOU tariff is optional,
which means it will be an applicable option for MV consumers For example, if
province is connected at the MV to  grid substation of the national grid, the
tariff will be decreased from US$139/kWh (during the day time, 7am to 9pm) to
US$095/kWh (night time, 9pm to 7am) Without the TOU, the basic tariff will be
decreased only from US$129/kWh to US$126/kWh in 2020 by the tariff reduction
plan Conceptually, this TOU tariff is applied for suppressing the electricity
utilisation of peak demand under current circumstances The TOU tariff is
expected to become the time-of-day rate system in the future 43 CAMBODIA BASIC
ENERGY PLAN Table 10 and Figure 19 show the MV tariff differences between rural,
grid-connected, and urban areas planned until 2020, along with neighbouring
countries as references17,18 The MV tariff of each rural, national grid, and
urban area has been planned to decrease from 2015 to However, the electricity
tariff in Cambodia is still the highest amongst its neighbouring countries
despite TOU implementation or after the cost reduction plan to In terms of
achieving affordable tariffs, these TOU and cost reduction plans should be
extended to Table 10 Time-of-Use Tariffs Tariff of use (US$/kWh) Applicable to
MV consumers :00–21:00 21:00–:00 Connected at MV to grid substation of national
grid 139 095 (Ref) Without TOU tariff in 2015 129 (Ref) Without TOU tariff in
2020 126 Connected at MV to sub-transmission line of national grid 179 140
Connected at MV to substation of Phnom Penh system 175 135 (Ref) Without TOU
tariff in 2015 177 (Ref) Without TOU tariff in 2020 162 Connected at MV to sub-
transmission line of Phnom Penh system 190 150 TOU = time of use Note: The sub-
transmission line is part of an electric power transmission system that runs at
relatively lower voltages It is uneconomical to connect all distribution
substations to the high main transmission voltage because the equipment is
larger and more expensive Source: EAC’ consolidated report for year 17 18   44
Figure 19 Electricity Tariff Differences in the MV at 22 kV 20 [Urban area]
[Rural area] TOU: ::00 Peak hour ,177 ,170 [National grid] ,162 ,162 TOU: ::00
15 Entertainment business )   TOU: 21:00-:00  / $   ( ff               ,129 ,126
10 ,096 TOU: 21:00-:00 ,090  ,062 05 Off-peak hour Agriculture
00 MV at 22 kV National grid, 2015 National grid, 2020 Urban area, 2015 Rural
area, 2015 Rural area, 2020 MV = megavolt, TOU = time of use Source: EAC’
consolidated report for year 2017; Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand
(EGAT) (2017); EVN (2017a); and Policy Asiapaciﬁcenergy () The implementation of
the TOU has  positive impact This can be seen in Figure 20, showing peak demand
curves for  whole day for 2011–19 Throughout the years, the curves fluctuate by
hours, and the consumption increases Due to operational and planned reasons,
flat demand curve will benefit operators and planners who choose  beneficial
electricity resource To improve this situation, two plans are recommended The
first plan is, as an example, an hourly base tariff system applying tariff
differences between day and night periods (TOU) Cambodia is conducting basic
actions in the agricultural sector and for MV consumers Water pump tariffs for
agriculture from 9pm to 7am are cheaper than during other times As mentioned
above, the TOU has been applied for MV consumers and is expected to be planned
for all low-voltage (LV) consumers 19  45 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure 20
Demand Differences MW ,200 ,100 ,000 900 800 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 HOUR
:                    :                                                    :   :
: : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Source:
Electricite Du Cambodge (EDC), (2016) The second plan is for cross-subsidies
from high-consumption users to low-consumption users, which increases tariff
differences According to Figure 18, the tariffs for electricity use in rural
areas for the <10 kWh purchase type in 2020 will decrease more than in urban
areas in 2020, although other purchase types of electricity will decrease to
almost the same level as the urban tariff in Figure 21 and Table 11 show the
tariff differences of provinces and Phnom Penh’ electrical consumption in 20,21
The graph shows that the higher the electrical consumption, the higher the
applied tariff Hence,  tariff excess for higher consumption is able to subsidise
tariff for lower consumption 20 21   46 Figure 21 Tariffs for All Types of
Residents’ Electrical Consumption in 2017 ,25                  ,    ,    ,  , ,
, , , ,20   ,    ,    ,    ,    ,  ,15   ,  ,12 ,12 ,12 ,10 ,10 ,08 ,07 ,06 ,05
Average: Thailand (2018), Lao PDR (2017), Viet Nam (2017) ,00 -10      > 2000
Types of residents’ electrical consumption (kWh/month) Provinces and rural areas
Phnom Penh and Takhmao Source: EAC’ consolidated report for year 2017;
Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (EGAT) (2017); EVN (2017a);
PolicyAsiapaciﬁcenergy (); and Derbyshire,  (2015) Table 11 Number of Residents
Categorised by Capacity of Supply in 2017 Types of residents’ electrical
consumption (kWh/month) Electricity supply (kWh) 101–200 201–1000  >=2000 –10
11–50 51–100 Provinces and rural areas Number of residents 241,147 902,268
312,543 152,398 90,401 ,564 ,480 Electrical power tariff [US$/kWh] 120 153 198
198 198 198 198 Phnom Penh and Takhmao Number of residents 116,942 193,369
70,076 92,199 124,200 ,170 ,173 Electrical power tariff [US$/kWh] 153 153 180
180 193 193 193 Average tariff (Thailand (2018), Viet Nam (2017), and Lao PDR
(2017)) Electrical power tariff [US$/kWh] 060 069 076 104 118 118 118 Source:
EAC’ consolidated report for year 47 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN To achieve
affordable tariffs for residents with low electricity consumption, the case
example of cross-subsidies by higher consumption is considered Table 12, Table
13, Figure 22, and Figure 23 show case examples of cross-subsidies for low
consumption from high consumption in the rural and urban areas The targets are
set in such  way that the lower tariff is the same as the average of the
neighbouring countries The target of Case  is the tariff of ‘–10 kWh/month’ of
electricity consumption, ‘US$12/month’ in the provinces and rural areas, and
‘US$15/month’ in Phnom Penh and Takhmao of ‘US$06/month’ The target of Case  is
Case  and the tariff of ‘11–50 kWh/month’ The target of Case  is Case  and the
tariff of ‘51–100 kWh/month’ Each case is considered to be the same tariff in
total In the most aggressive case, Case , the additional tariff is +US$32/kWh by
over ,000 kWh/month in the provinces and rural areas The tariff will be ‘52
kWh/month’ from ‘20 kWh/month’ The tariff of less than 100 kWh/ month will be
the same level as for neighbouring countries The acceptable additional tariff in
Cambodia can be estimated based on the GDP per capita for Thailand’ case22 Table
14 shows the composition by macroeconomic position in The maximum cross-subsidy
of Cambodia is +US$32/kWh (Table 12) However, the ,000 capita of cross-
subsidy/GDP per capita shows +US$22/ kWh, which is still higher than for
Thailand If this case is acceptable, Phnom Penh and Takhmao (Table 13) hold the
potential for achieving the affordable tariff of less than 100 kWh/month via
cross-subsidy while the provinces and rural areas have the chance to achieve the
affordable tariff of less than 50 kWh/month via the cross-subsidy Therefore, the
low consumers are expected to receive the benefits from the cross-subsidy from
high consumers in Cambodia Table 12 Case Example of Cross-subsidy for Low
Consumption from High Consumption in Rural Areas Provinces and rural areas Case
>=2000 –10 11–50 51–100 101–200 201–1000 +00 (+00%) [15->15] +00 (+00%) [20->20]
+00 (+00%) [20->20] +00 (+00%) [20->20] +00 (+04%) [20->20] +00 (+10%) [20->20]
-06 (-72%) [12->06] +00 (+03%) [20->20 +00 (+06%) [20->20] +01 (+10%) [20->20]
+06 (+%) [20->26] +13 (+%) [20->33]  -08 (-%) [15->07] -12 (-%) [20->08] +01
(+15%) [20->20] +01 (+25%) [20->21] +15 (+%) [20->35] +32 (+%) [20->52]  Notes:
Case : Electrical consumption (–10 kWh/month): Tariff 12 -> 06 US$/kWh Case :
Case  and electrical consumption (11–50 kWh/month): Tariff 15 -> 07 US$/kWh Case
: Case  and electrical consumption (51–100 kWh/month): Tariff 20 -> 08 US$/kWh
Source: Author (As an outcome of the dialogue with MME, Ministry of Mines and
Energy) 22  48 Figure 22 Case Example of Cross-subsidy for Low Consumption from
High Consumption in Rural Areas ,60    , +% (+32US$/kWh) ,50 )   ,40     / $   (
ff               ,    , ,30    ,                                  , , , , , , ,
, , , , ,20    ,    ,    ,        ,10   , , , ,00 -10      >2000 Type of
resident electrical consumption (kWh/month) Provinces and rural areas Case  Case
Case  Source: Author (outcome of the dialogue with theMinistry of Mines and
Energy); EAC’ consolidated report for year Table 13 Case Example of Cross-
subsidy for Low Consumption from High Consumption in Urban Areas Phnom Penh and
Takhmao Case  >=2000 –10 11–50 51–100 101–200 201–1000 +00 (+00%) [15->15] +00
(+00%) [18->18] +00 (+00%) [18->18] +00 (+00%) [19->19 +00 (+03%) [19->19] +01
(+12%) [19->20]  -09 (-41%) [15->06] +00 (+03%) [18->18] +00 (+02%) [18->18] +00
(+02) [19->19] +01 (+29%) [19->21] +05 (+97%) [19->24]  -08 (-%) [15->07] -10
(-%) [18->08] +00 (+05%) [18->18] +00 (+04%) [19->19] +03 (+63%) [19->23] +11
(+%) [19->30]  Notes: Case : Electrical consumption (–10 kWh/month): Tariff 15
-> 06 US$/kWh Case : Case  and Electrical consumption (11–50 kWh/month): Tariff
15 -> 07 US$/kWh Case : Case  and electrical consumption (51–100 kWh/month):
Tariff 18 -> 08 US$/kWh Source: Author (As an outcome of the dialogue with MME,
Ministry of Mines and Energy) 49 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure 23 Case
Example of Cross-subsidy for Low Consumption from High Consumption in Urban
Areas ,60 ,50 )   ,40 +% (+11US$/kWh)  / $   ( ff                  , ,30       ,
,      ,    ,    ,    ,    ,    ,    ,  ,   ,    ,    ,    ,    ,  , ,20    ,
,           ,10 , , , ,00 -10      >2000 Type of resident electrical consumption
(kWh/month) Provinces and rural areas Case  Case  Case  Source: Author (outcome
of the dialogue with the Ministry of Mines and Energy); EAC’ consolidated report
for year Table 14 Composition by Macro-economic Position in 2018 Population
(millions) GDP per capita (US$) Cross-subsidy (US$/kWh) Cross-subsidy/GDP per
capita*,000 (US$) Country … +32 (Estimated result in 2017) Cambodia ,485 … +22 …
+43 (Actual case in 2011 to 2012) Thailand ,084 … +20 Source: International
Monetary Fund (); International Institute for sustainable development (2014) As
described in Figure 21, the tariff of Cambodia is higher than that of
neighbouring countries despite the continuing increase in electrification rate
The high rates of electricity tariff make Cambodia less competitive in global
and regional trade and investment One factor is due to high generation and
transmission costs23,24 The main cause regarding the generation cost is the
restrictive power purchase agreements, causing unused capacity excess during the
rainy season and investment rewards In order to achieve an affordable tariff,
Cambodia should continue national grid expansion and pursue agreements with
neighbouring countries to allow exports of surplus generation In the longer
term, Cambodia should actively encourage the expansion of cross-border power
trading in the 23  and-supplies-Final-Reportpdf  committee-rptcc 24 50 GMS under
the institutional arrangements in place and, in particular, the development of
shorter-term trading arrangements This will provide  means for Cambodia to
better balance supply and demand on its electricity system In most countries
around the world, there is  significantly increasing trend in grid- connected
distributed generation, and also  decreasing trend in the generation cost of
renewable energy Therefore, it is also necessary to design  framework for
considering grid connection The heads of ASEAN power utilities and authorities
are implementing  study for establishing the institution for the ASEAN Power
Grid, named the APG Generation and Transmission System Planning (AGTP) and APG
Transmission System Operator (ATSO)25 This related institution will support
establishing the framework and guidelines for  standardised national grid
amongst ASEAN countries Below are the summarised targets for Targets by 2030 •
Prolong the tariff cost reduction plan from 2020 to 2030 in terms of obtaining
an electricity tariff at an affordable price • Consider the extension of  TOU
tariff to LV consumers and enhance the tariff differences between high and low
consumption • Continue to pursue an agreement with neighbouring countries
allowing exports of surplus generation • Develop the guidelines for standardised
grid connection26 25 Chea Vannak (2017), ‘Cabinet approves power projects’, The
Khmer Times, 20 February 26  Infrastructurepdf 51 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN
Necessary action plans and policies Achieve affordable tariffs Extending the
cost reduction plan to 2030, expanding the TOU to LV consumers, and cross-
subsidy tariff considerations are expected to achieve affordable tariffs in
Cambodia Under the electricity law, there are two governmental entities
responsible for regulating the electricity supply sector: the EAC and the MME27
Possessing different functions and responsibilities, these two institutions are
expected to conduct the study of  TOU tariff for LV consumers in the short term
As  result, the tariff will be applied accordingly with the type of electricity
consumption • Action : Consider cross-subsidies from high consumers to low
consumers • Action : Conduct  study of the TOU tariff for LV consumers Achieve
low generation and distribution costs • Action : Continue to pursue an agreement
with neighbouring countries allowing the exports of surplus generation • Action
: Develop the guidelines for standardised grid connection  Roadmap According to
the necessary action plans and policies, the recommended roadmap will consist of
three terms as follows: Short term, 2019–2022: • Consider the cross-subsidy from
high consumers to low consumers • Study TOU tariff for LV consumers and tariff
difference expansion • Study the guidelines for considering  standardised grid
connection • Cite ‘cost reduction’ and ‘development distribution network’ as
important legislative goals 27  52 Medium term, 2023–2026: • Prolong the tariff
reduction plan as supported by the current study in the short term • Amend the
electricity regulation to operate  tariff system by the MME and EAC • Establish
the guidelines for  standardised grid connection Long term, 2027–2030: • MME and
EAC operate  tariff system according to electricity consumption from the
economic perspective • Review on  routine basis every – years to attain further
benefits of electricity References Asian Development Bank [ADB] (2016), Vietnam
Energy Sector Assessment, Strategyy and Road Map Manila: ADB Available at:
institutional-document/vie-energy-road-mappdf (access 15 February2019) Breeze,
(2010), The Cost of Power Generation Warwick: Business Insight Available at:
(access 15 February2019) Derbyshire,  (2015), Cambodia – In Depth Study on
electricity Cost and Supplies Final Report Phnom Penh: Solar Energy Association
Cambodia [SEAC] Available at:   on-electricity-cost-and-supplies-Final-Reportpdf
(access 15 February2019) EAC’ Consolidated report for year 2017 (unpublished
paper) Electiricty Authority of Cambodia (EAC) (2017), Report on Power Sector of
the Kingdom of Cambodia, 2017 Edition, Phnom Penh: EAC Available at:
viewfile?param=annual_report%2Fenglish%2FAnnual-Report-2016-enpdf&lang=en
(access 15 February2019) Electricite Du Cambodge [EDC], (2016), Annual Report
Phnom Penh: EDC Available  publish%20English%20versionpdf (access 15
February2019) at: Electricity Authority of Cambodia () Home Page Available at:
site/index?lang=en (access 15 February2019) 53 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN
Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand [EGAT] (2017), Annual Report
Bangkok: EGAT Available at:  annual-eng-pdf (access 15 February2019) EVN
(2017a), Vietnam Electricity Annual Report 2017, Hanoi: EVN Available at:
enevncomvn/userfile/User/huongbtt/files//AnnualReport2017pdf (access 15
February2019) EVN (2017b), Retail Electricity Tariff EVN website Available at:
d6/gioi-thieu-/RETAIL-ELECTRICITY-TARIFF--28-aspx (access 15 February 2019) IEA,
NEA, and OECD (2015), Projected Cost of Generating Electricity 2015 edition
Paris:  IEA Available at: electricity-pdf (access 15 February2019) International
Institute for sustainable development (2014), ‘ Citizen’ Guide to Energy
Subsidies in Thailand, Geneva: IISD Available at:
default/files/ffs_thailand_czguidepdf (access 15 February2019) International
Monetary Fund [IMF] (), ‘Real GDP Growth’, IMF Available at:   WEOWORLD (access
15 February2019) Killeen,  (2013), ‘Laos Electrification Rural Program
Planning’, Report of Program SHS and P2P Laos: World watch Insititute Available
at:  files/Laos%20Atlas%20Case%20Study%20FINALpdf (access 15 February2019)
Kingdom of Cambodia (2014), Preparatory survey for Phnom Penh city transmission
and distribution system Expansion Project Phase II in the kingdom of Cambodia,
final report 2014, JICA, NEWJEC Inc The Chugoku Electric Power Co, Inc Available
at:  jicareportjicagojp/pdf/12182697_01pdf (access 15 February2019)
PolicyAsiapacificenergy(), LAO PDR: Electricity Price 2018’, Available at:
policyasiapacificenergyorg/node (access 15 February2019) Thailand Board of
Investment (), ‘Utility Cost’ BOI website: indexphp?page=utility_costs (access
15 February2019) 54 CHAPTER  RENEWABLE ENERGY  Current situation of renewable
energy Cambodia is blessed with substantial renewable energy sources such as
hydro, solar, biomass (including biogas), and wind However, these renewable
energy resources, particularly non-hydro renewable energy, have not yet been
tapped to fulfil energy demand in Cambodia The total primary energy supply
(TPES) in 2015 was  million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe), supplied by
renewable energy (mostly biomass) (%), oil (%), coal (%), and electricity
imports (%) In terms of electricity, the total installed capacity in 2015 was
,megawatts (MW), coming from hydro (%), coal (%), oil (%), and biomass (%)
Hydropower () In 2006, the Ministry for Industry, Mines and Energy (now known as
the Ministry of Mines and Energy) and the Cambodian National Mekong Committee
(CNMC) reviewed hydropower and identified 60 possible sites for hydro
development in Cambodia with the potential for approximately 10,000 MW of power
generation, of which 50% was on the mainstream Mekong, 40% on its tributaries,
and 10% in the southwest outside the Mekong Basin There are about 63 possible
sites for small and large hydropower projects throughout the country However,
currently only around ,330 MW has been tapped, which is only 13% of the
potential, and other projects are under development and feasibility studies The
production of electricity from hydropower dams has increased significantly in
recent years For example, hydropower electricity production in 2011 was just
gigawatt hours (GWh) and increased almost 50 times to GWh in 55 CAMBODIA BASIC
ENERGY PLAN Biomass (including biogas) () The potential of biomass mostly comes
from  variety of agricultural residues, such as rice husks, cassava, coconuts,
and animal waste Biomass is commonly used in rural areas for cooking Rural
households still rely on traditional biomass energy, mainly fuelwood, as their
primary cooking fuel However, most households burn biomass in traditional ways,
by using traditional and inefficient stoves, which produce toxic smoke that
pollutes the air inside and outside homes The toxic smoke can be  major health
risk factor in Cambodia, such as for asthma and acute respiratory infections,
particularly amongst children  number of studies show that the use of solid
fuels, especially amongst households in rural areas, is closely linked to  high
incidence of respiratory diseases To reduce or mitigate such household
pollution, improved or advanced stoves that burn biomass in cleaner and more
efficient ways should be promoted Biogas from animal waste for generating high-
quality gas for lighting and cooking has been used by rural households Around
25,383 biogas digesters with capacities varying from  m3 to 15 m3 were
constructed in rural areas until In terms of electricity, Cambodia has used
biomass power plants since 2006 with an installed capacity of 50 MW, and this
has gradually increased to around 64 MW in Solar () The average solar radiation
in Cambodia is around  kWh/day, with an average sunshine duration of – hours per
day, or around ,400–,800 kWh/m2 At present, one solar photovoltaic (PV) unit of
10 MW has been installed and connected to the grid, and another three solar PV
units with  total capacity of 25 MW are under development In addition, since
2012, around 48,980 units (–50  peak) of solar home systems with  total capacity
of 625 kW have been installed in rural areas The 2016 Mekong Strategic Partners
report projected the potential for solar PV in Cambodia to be 700 MW, which can
be installed on ,400 hectares of land Solar PV projects are projected to
increase However, as land is  sensitive issue in Cambodia, the development of
rooftop solar PV is potentially to be developed for residential buildings and
also existing dam reservoirs instead of land 56 () Wind Cambodia’ wind potential
is located mostly in the southern part of the great lake Tonley Sap, the
mountainous districts in the southwest and the coastal regions, such as
Sihanoukville, Kampot, Kep, and Koh Kong, which have an annual average wind
speed of  /  Major issues Electricity demand in Cambodia has grown at an average
of nearly 20% per year since Electricity demand is mostly supplied by large-
scale hydropower and coal-fired power plants Although Cambodia has the potential
for non-hydro renewable energy, such as biomass, wind, and solar, non-hydro
renewable energy is not yet utilised optimally due to barriers such as higher
up-front costs and no clear target for renewable energy in the energy mix No
clear target () Renewable energy targets are defined as numerical goals
established by governments to achieve  specific amount of renewable energy
production or consumption in the entire energy mix (TPES or total final energy
consumption [TFES]) They can apply to electricity or heating/cooling or to the
energy sector as  whole For example, Indonesia has set  renewable energy target
of 23% by 2025 and Thailand of 40% by 2036, while ASEAN’ renewable energy target
is 23% by renewable energy target sends an important signal to stakeholders, and
it plays  significant role in informing investment decisions Renewable energy
targets contribute to developing  clearer vision for the development of the
sector and enable stakeholders to allocate funding more effectively Specific
design issues for policymakers to consider include whether the target should be
established in absolute terms ( specific quantity of energy to be supplied) or
relative to  moving baseline (, in percentage terms) and whether electricity
targets should be set in capacity (megawatts) or in output (megawatt-hour) terms
Renewable energy targets need to be accompanied by  clear strategy and backed by
specific policies and measures Although the Government of Cambodia has issued
policies and regulations in the energy sector, some of which are linked to
renewable energy utilisation, the government has not yet set  national target
for renewable energy utilisation This means there is no clear signal to
stakeholders, particularly to the private sector, to convince them or to
guarantee that their investments in renewable energy projects will give them
benefits and profit, especially for the national energy supply security 57
CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN () Lack of policy and regulations to support the
promotion of renewable energy utilisation The Government of Cambodia is
committed to implementing sustainable energy security The government has set up
the Cambodia Energy Policy, which aims to provide an adequate supply of energy
throughout Cambodia at  reasonable and affordable price; to ensure  reliable and
secure electricity supply at  reasonable price, which facilitates investment in
Cambodia and the development of the national economy; to encourage exploration
and the environmentally and socially acceptable development of energy sources
needed for supply to all sectors of the Cambodian economy; and to encourage the
efficient use of energy and to minimise the detrimental environmental effects
resulting from energy supply and consumption The government has also set up
policy targets: by 2020, 100% of villages in the country should have access to
electricity, and by 2030, at least 70% of the total households in the country
should have access to quality grid-supplied electricity Achieving these targets
will depend on the utilisation of all types of electricity sources and the
participation of the relevant stakeholders The Electricity Law (2001) provides
the governing framework for the electricity power supply and services throughout
the Kingdom of Cambodia The law covers all activities related to the supply of
electricity, provision of services, and use of electricity and other associated
activities in the power sector The National Policy on Rural Electrification by
renewable energy has the objectives of providing clean, reliable, safe, and
reasonably priced electricity in rural areas based on primarily renewable energy
in  fair and equitable way The Development Plan 2008–2021 projects that ,770 MW
will be constructed in 2020, of which ,241 MW will be supplied by hydropower The
National Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014–2023 is  comprehensive national
policy that promotes the use of renewable energy to mitigate greenhouse gas
emissions The Government of Cambodia has made  major commitment to reducing the
carbon intensity of its energy sector as part of its Intended Nationally
Determined Contribution (INDC) Under its INDC, Cambodia proposed  contribution
to mitigating greenhouse gases, conditional upon the availability of support
from the international community, of  16% reduction from the 2030 energy sector
business-as-usual scenario The priorities of the INDC actions are the following:
58 • national grid-connected renewable energy generation (solar energy, hydro,
biomass, and biogas); • connecting decentralised renewable generation to the
grid; • off-grid electricity, such as solar home systems, hydro (pico, micro,
and mini); and • promoting energy efficiency by end users In 2013, Prime
Minister Hun Sen launched the Cambodian Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014–2023,
the National Policy for Green Growth 2013–2030, and the National Strategic Plan
for Green Growth 2013–2030, all of which propose policy actions in the energy
sector that can support greener, more inclusive growth, including increasing
renewable energy deployment, facilitating loans for sustainable projects, and
improving the energy efficiency of industries and households To realise
sustainable energy security, particularly in the field of the power sector, the
government set up strategies for developing generation through increasing the
diversification of the power supply, such as through hydro, coal power,
importing electricity, and other renewable energy sources (biomass, solar, and
wind), to meet the electricity demand and reduce oil for power generation
However, since there is no specific target for the renewable energy share in the
national energy mix and no clear regulation or policy, the renewable energy
business in Cambodia is relatively low, particularly for non- hydro The
Government of Cambodia ratified the Paris Agreement in 2016 and has agreed to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions,
particularly in the energy sector, cannot be achieved without increasing the
utilisation of renewable energy significantly Therefore, sustainable energy
security, environmental protection, and climate change mitigation in Cambodia
are major drivers for scaling up renewable energy deployment The government
should take action to develop strong policies, regulations, and incentives for
investors to make them more interested in investing in the renewable energy
industry Cambodia has some good experience in implementing renewable energy
projects, but it needs to develop policy instruments based on the lessons
learned in other countries that have already successfully implemented renewable
energy projects The Ministry of Mines and Energy of Cambodia, together with
related institutions, such as the Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Finance,
and the Electricity Authority of Cambodia, will start drafting regulations and
incentives for renewable energy, such as feed-in tariffs (FITs), reducing import
taxes on renewable energy technology/ equipment, financing support mechanisms,
the simplification of permit procedures, and grid system and renewable energy
standards 59 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN  Assessment of the voluntary renewable
energy target Electricity demand in Cambodia has been increasing significantly
by around 18% annually from 2010 to Coal (29%) and hydro (52%) are two primary
sources of power, together accounting for 81% of the total installed capacity in
2017, while other renewable power plants using wood and other biomass comprised
only % The total installed capacity was ,867 MW Cambodia does not have fossil
energy resources, so for its coal and diesel power generation, the country
imports coal and fuel oil from other countries To strengthen the national energy
security of supply as well as to achieve the national target of emission
reduction as already stated in the INDC, the Government of Cambodia should
increase the use of renewable energy, which is locally available The government
should reduce the use of coal and diesel power plants Based on the Cambodia
Energy Outlook, the most possible energy mix in the year 2030 comprises hydro at
55% and non-hydro renewable energy at 10% (biomass, solar PV, and wind) of the
projected total electricity output of TWh  Necessary renewable energy policies
To achieve the target as mentioned, there needs to be strong regulation Hydro ()
The average production cost of electricity from hydropower is less than
US$07/kWh, which is less than the national electricity tariff of US$20/kWh So,
from the economical point of view, there is no need for the government to issue
new regulation, since hydropower can be developed on  commercial basis However,
hydropower projects are always subject to environmental issues Most hydropower
project developments are strongly opposed by environmentalists and local people
Even  common study by the Mekong River Commission shows that dam construction
has negative impacts on the riparian ecosystem, sustainability, and food
security associated with fish production in Cambodia In order to maximise the
use of hydropower but minimise its negative impacts, the government needs to
have strategies on how to mitigate the predicted negative impacts For such
purposes, the government should issue regulations that guarantee that hydropower
project developments comply with all steps to achieve  high-quality
environmental impact assessment and also  transparent decision-making process 60
() Wiser use of biomass through efficient cooking stoves As mentioned, many
rural households rely on biomass, particularly for cooking, by using simple
traditional cooking stoves (three big stones) Unaware of the harmful effects of
household air pollution, the users of firewood stoves expose themselves daily to
toxic smoke, increasing the risk of asthma, lung tuberculosis, and acute
respiratory infections, particularly amongst children  World Health Organization
publication (2018) estimates that over  million people around the globe die each
year from using traditional cooking stoves Realising the importance of biomass
in rural areas, the Government of Cambodia has taken action since some years ago
to examine how to use biomass/fuelwood in efficient ways as well as tackle
indoor pollution There are several improved cookstoves that have already been
introduced to rural households, such as the New Lao Stove introduced by the
Group for the Environment, Renewable Energy and Solidarity in The New Lao Stove
is more resistant and consumes less biomass fuel, using 22% less fuelwood, and
each stove saves  tonnes of CO2-equivalent per year In 10 years until 2013,
million New Lao Stove units have been distributed by the Group for the
Environment, Renewable Energy and Solidarity Promoting the wide use of efficient
biomass cookstoves, particularly in rural areas, requires strong policies and
regulations that emphasise improving energy access for remote and poor
populations The policies and regulations should be able to create an enabling
environment for developing the biomass cookstove business and markets by
providing incentives The Ministry of Energy and Mining of Cambodia should take
the lead in developing  road map or  master plan to scale up access to clean
biomass cooking stoves and developing national standards, testing, and
certifications for biomass cookstoves Gradual increase of solar PV and wind ()
At present, the use of solar PV and wind power generation in Cambodia is small
compared to other countries, both in the ASEAN region and internationally The
development of solar PV generation is expected to improve the overall energy
sector in Cambodia With the relatively high potential of solar PV and wind power
in Cambodia, it is projected that solar PV and wind power will gradually
increase, both to strengthen the security of the energy supply and to tackle
climate change The projection is also supported by the decline in cost The
International Renewable Energy Agency states that from 2010 to 2017, the cost of
solar fell by 60% and wind by 40% The predicted cost will continue to fall
because of more efficient designs and advances in materials and manufacturing
Solar rooftops will also increase because of the price of land However, to scale
up solar PV and wind power projects will require huge investment Therefore,
cooperation and collaboration with international financing are strongly needed,
such as from the Asian Development Bank, 61 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN World
Bank, USAID, Japan International Cooperation Agency, European countries, KfW of
Germany, and Agence Française de Développement of France Introduction of
existing renewable energy policies () In general, renewable energy is mostly
claimed to have  high cost of production, which results in  cost per kilowatt-
hour of electricity that is relatively expensive compared with that of
conventional power plants On the contrary, renewable energy is clean energy,
which means the emissions from renewable energy are very low compared to fossil
energy However, there are still some barriers facing the development of
renewable energy projects To increase renewable energy utilisation, the barriers
should be removed by creating an enabling policy environment that can encourage
the private sector to participate in investment in the renewable energy projects
Countries with  low level of renewable energy development and small-scale
projects, such as Cambodia, need regulations to scale up renewable energy
deployment In many countries around the world, such as in Europe, the United
States, Japan, India, and ASEAN countries such as Thailand, the Philippines,
Indonesia, and Malaysia, governments have issued various policies and
regulations to scale up renewable energy deployment Various regulations have
been implemented in many countries, such as FITs, Renewable Portfolio Standards
(RPS), net metering systems, and other incentives to encourage and scale up
renewable energy business Renewable Portfolio Standards ) RPS mandate that
certain percentages of all electricity in the country come from renewable energy
sources The RPS mechanism commonly places an obligation on electricity supply
companies to produce  specified fraction of their electricity from renewable
energy sources The RPS can be achieved through three mechanisms: () by producing
renewable energy itself, () by purchasing renewable energy produced by another
supplier, or () by buying renewable energy credit certificates These
certificates are issued to renewable energy producers based on the amount of
energy they feed into the grid Selling the certificates is another way for
renewable energy producers to supplement their revenue The RPS encourages the
development of renewable energy markets by ensuring that some specified minimum
amount of renewable energy is included in the supplier’ portfolio of generating
fuels The RPS can play an integral role in  country’ efforts to diversify its
energy mix, promote domestic energy production, and reduce emissions However,
the RPS can cause electricity price increases because, in many cases, the cost
of electricity from renewable energy is higher than that of conventional energy
This means that consumers will spend more for electricity In addition, the RPS
need transmission and integration system upgrades to enable the absorption of
more electricity from renewable energy Because of the intermittent nature of
renewable energy, in terms of planning 62 reserves, as the amount of variable
generation gets added to the electricity system, it is possible that more fossil
peak-power generation will be needed in order to maintain reserve requirements
The RPS mechanism has been adopted in many countries For example, Germany set
the RPS at 18%, 30%, and 60%, respectively, in 2020, 2030, and Feed-in tariffs )
FITs are an instrument for encouraging large-scale renewable energy projects
since they provide  stable income to developers  FIT is  fixed price or standard
purchasing price that is paid to renewable energy producers for each unit of
electricity produced and injected into the electricity grid  FIT is intended to
encourage the adoption of renewable energy by overcoming the high upfront costs
of renewable energy projects FITs offer an effective way of achieving the RPS
FITs are usually differentiated from renewable energy technology due to the
differences in generation costs between the renewable energy technology FITs are
also used for the size of the renewable energy project, such as for small and
medium capacity The payment of the FIT is guaranteed for  certain period of
time, which is often related to the economic lifetime of the respective
renewable energy project  FIT is usually paid by the electricity grid system or
market operators in the long-term contract of the power purchase agreement The
level of  FIT is determined on the basis of  calculation of the levelised cost
of electricity produced from renewable energy This allows the renewable energy
investor to recover the different costs (capital, operation and maintenance,
fuel, and finances) while realising  return on the investment that depends on
the assumed financing cost It is also possible to determine the FIT level by
means of  tendering mechanism As  FIT is  cost-based price, the price for
renewable energy-based power plant will be higher than for  conventional-based
power plant or national electricity tariff As  consequence, the government
should allocate budget to cover the gap; or the FIT can be passed through to
consumers, and it is possible to increase the electricity tariff When
introducing  FIT, some key components must be considered: • Determining  good
tariff rate If the tariff rate is too high, producers will benefit more, but the
government will bear or provide more subsidies, or consumers will pay  higher
electricity tariff If the tariff rate is too low, there will be little or no
investment Imposing  priority purchase obligation for renewable energy Grid
operators should prioritise connecting and transmitting electricity from
renewable resources before energy from other sources • 63 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY
PLAN • Guaranteed tariff rates for  specific time period/length of contract This
ensures the security of investment for producers, investors, and suppliers •
Determining the renewable energy technologies to be covered • The size of the
eligible project The advantages of FITs include the following: • Guaranteed
long-term contracts (usually 15–20 years) • Increased drive for technology
innovation Good FIT rates for renewable energy encourage investment in renewable
energy business • Secure domestic energy supply Countries will become less
dependent on imported fossil fuels when the domestic renewable energy supply
market expands • Creation of jobs The growth of the renewable energy market will
increase job opportunities Analysis by the International Renewable Energy Agency
has shown that the renewable energy sector is already creating jobs across
Southeast Asia, estimated at 611,000 jobs in 2016, of which 362 jobs were in
bioenergy, while the rest were in hydropower, solar, wind, and geothermal energy
• Reduction of CO2 emissions because renewable energy is from clean energy
sources • Enables renewable energy technologies to compete with conventional
energy sources • Easier for developers to get project financing The
disadvantages of FITs include the following: • Likely to cause an increase in
the cost of electricity for customers unless subsidies or incentives are
available • Utilities need to improve their grid system to enable absorbing more
renewable energy REN 21 (2014) states that 73 countries have adopted FITs The
lessons learned from many countries, such as Germany, Denmark, Spain, Japan,
India, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Malaysia show that FITs have
proven to be very effective in speeding the transitions to the use of renewable
energy for producing electricity and also for helping society to effectively
address climate change The example of Japan’ FIT is shown in Table  64 Table
Feed-in Tariff for Renewable Energy in Japan, 2012 Period of contract (years)
Resource JPY/kWh US$/kWh Wind < 20 kW 75 735 20 > 20 kW 294 20 Geothermal < 15
MW 42 534 15 > 15 MW 347 15 Hydro >200 KW 454 20 >200 KW <  MW 45 387 20 >  MW <
30 MW 321 20 Photovoltaics < 10 KW 42 534 10 > 10 KW 42 534 20 JPY = Japanese
yen, kWh = kilowatt-hour, US$ = United States dollar Source: IEA, Net metering )
Net metering is  billing mechanism that credits solar energy system owners for
the electricity they add to the grid If residential customers have  PV system on
their house rooftops, they may generate more electricity than the home uses
during daylight hours If the home is net-metered, the electricity meter will run
backward to provide  credit against what electricity is consumed at night or
other periods where the home’ electricity use exceeds the system’ output
Customers are only billed for their ‘net’ energy use Net metering allows utility
consumers to generate their own electricity cleanly and efficiently Net metering
is more suitable for small-scale renewable-based distributed generation During
the day, most solar consumers produce more electricity than they consume, which
allows them to export that power to the grid and reduce their future bills As
such, solar PV enables local self-consumption that can deliver savings to the
grid This can result in  significant reduction in the monthly electricity
consumption of the owner of  solar PV system It can complement the grid and
provide benefits and potential cost reductions for both the end consumers and
the grid system  net metering system is easy 65 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN and
inexpensive With the net metering system, the installed solar PV does not need
battery backup to store power, meaning that the investment for the solar PV
system can be reduced Net metering increases demand for solar energy systems,
which in turn creates jobs for the installers, electricians, and manufacturers
who work in the solar supply chain However, for utility companies, the net
metering system means shrinking profits because consumers buy less power from
the utility Financial and fiscal incentives ) Financial and fiscal incentives
are aimed at decreasing the production cost of renewable energy projects and
increasing their affordability and bankability Financial and fiscal incentives
are needed to improve access to capital, lower financing costs, and reduce the
burden of the high upfront costs of large-scale renewable energy projects They
can be in the form of tax incentives, rebates, or grants Tax incentives are
typically offered in the form of  reduction in value-added, tax
allowance/accelerated depreciation, or investment tax credit Tax incentives can
reduce the cost of renewable energy systems for the developer and can increase
their affordability and profitability Many countries have adopted tax incentives
to increase renewable energy deployment 66 Table  Summary of Advantages and
Disadvantages of Renewable Portfolio Standards, Feed-in Tariffs, and Net
Metering Renewable portfolio standards Feed-in tariffs Net metering • RPS can
play an integral role in • Guaranteed long-term contracts • Net metering allows
utility countries’ efforts to diversify their energy mix, promote domestic
energy production, and reduce emissions consumers to generate their own
electricity cleanly and efficiently (usually 15–20 years) • Increased drive for
technology innovation Good FIT rates for renewable energy encourage investment
in renewable energy business • Net metering allows consumers to export power to
the grid and reduce their future bills • It can complement the grid and provide
potential cost reductions to both the end consumers and the grid system • The
net metering system is easy • RPS encourage the development of renewable energy
markets by ensuring that some speciﬁed minimum amount of renewable energy is
included in the supplier’ portfolio of generating fuels • Secure domestic energy
supply Countries will become less dependent on imported fossil fuels when the
domestic renewable energy supply market expands and inexpensive • With the net
metering system, the installed solar PV does not need  battery backup to store
power This means that the investment for solar PV system can be reduced •
Creation of jobs The growth of the renewable energy market will increase job
opportunities Analysis by the International Renewable Energy Agency has shown
that the renewable energy sector is already creating jobs across Southeast Asia,
estimated at 611,000 jobs in 2016, of which 362 jobs were in bioenergy while the
rest were in hydropower, solar, wind, and geothermal energy Advantages • Net
metering increases demand for solar energy systems, which in turn creates jobs
for the installers, electricians, and manufacturers who work in the solar supply
chain • Reduction of CO2 emissions because renewable energy is from clean energy
sources • Enables renewable energy technologies to compete with conventional
energy sources Easier for developers to get project ﬁnancing • RPS can cause the
electricity prices because the cost of electricity from renewable energy is
higher than conventional energy • Likely to cause an increase in the cost of
electricity to customers unless subsidies or incentives are available • The
utility companies may have shrinking proﬁts because consumers buy less power
from the utility • RPS needs transmission and • The utility needs to improve its
grid system to enable it to absorb more renewable energy integration system
upgrades to enable the absorption of more electricity from renewable energy •
Because of the intermittent nature of renewable energy, it is possible that more
fossil peak-power generation will be needed in order to maintain reserve
requirements Disadvantages PV = photovoltaic, RPS = Renewable Portfolio
Standards Source: Summary taken from section  67 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN
Rural electrification ) Cambodia as  developing country has many rural areas
that have not yet been reached by the national grid To increase access to
electricity, using locally available renewable energy may be  solution However,
the development of renewable energy-based power plants in rural areas may not be
commercially viable because people’ ability to pay is low The Government of
Cambodia has set an electrification target of increasing the level of villages’
access to grid-quality electricity to 100% by 2020; and at least 70% of all
households in Cambodia are to have access to grid-quality electricity by This
means that in 2030, it is projected that around 30% of households will not have
access to the grid, and these households will mostly be in rural areas that face
difficulty or high costs of being reached by the grid system For such areas, the
implementation of standalone or decentralised systems using renewable energy is
an appropriate option Solar home systems, for example, are standalone systems,
and micro hydropower and solar PV decentralised systems may be economical for
remote rural households that do not have access to the grid for long periods
Since the production cost of renewable energy-based power plants is high, and
the electricity price from renewable energy is higher, the high cost of
providing services to remote areas and the low consumption mean that rural
electrification schemes are usually more costly than urban schemes However, it
seems there is  strong correlation between rural poverty and access to
electricity because electricity is  pre-requisite for productive activities
Rural electricity programmes seem to be crucial for implementing improved living
conditions and promoting production and better health and education for
households However, the electricity tariffs in rural areas do not need to be the
same as in urban areas Rural electricity tariffs should be set at  level that is
affordable for the majority of customers Therefore, to increase the access of
rural people to electricity, the government should support rural electrification
programmes through collaboration with international banks For such purposes, the
Government of Cambodia, supported by the World Bank, established the Rural
Electrification Fund (REF) in The REF is intended to provide grants for
promoting rural electrification by renewable energy technologies The REF has
facilitated access by rural people to electricity through solar home systems by
providing subsidies of US$100 per solar home system unit With the subsidy, solar
home systems have become more competitive in rural areas Since the government’
funding for rural electrification is limited, to accelerate the implementation
of rural electrification programmes, the Ministry of Mines and Energy should
actively seek international support such as from the Asian Development Bank, the
Japan International Cooperation Agency, USAID, Global Environment Facility, the
Carbon Fund of the World Bank, and from European countries, such as Germany’
GIZ, 68 Denmark, the Netherlands, France, Finland, and Norway, which provide
some assistance to developing countries to develop rural electrification In
addition, the government should take into consideration the open access of rural
people to microfinance  Recommendations Based on Cambodia’ energy situation, in
order to speed up the deployment of renewable energy, the government needs to
take action, particularly in setting up policy and regulations For such
purposes, we recommended the following measures: • In the short and medium terms
: Set up  target for renewable energy in the energy mix for : Set up regulations
on environmental issues for hydropower development : Set up regulations for
using biomass-efficient cooking stoves and developing national standards,
testing, and certifications for biomass cookstoves The government, through the
Ministry of Mines and Energy, should actively seek international funding
resources (grants and soft loans) • In the medium and long terms : Study to
apply FITs (up to  certain capacity, for example  capacity up to 10 MW) for
biomass, solar, and wind power generation : Study to apply  net metering system
to encourage the use of solar rooftops : Study to apply renewable portfolio
standards and financing and fiscal incentives Reference International Energy
Agency [IEA] (2017] Feed-in Tariff for Renewable Electricity and Solar PV
Auction Access at [ name-30660-enphp] Access date [27 January 2019] 69 CAMBODIA
BASIC ENERGY PLAN CHAPTER  ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION  Introduction
Energy is fundamental to  nation’ economic development and progress, and it is
needed for industry, commercial, and residential activities besides
transportation Therefore, energy security is critical to any nation Energy
efficiency (EE) as discussed in this chapter includes energy efficiency and
conservation (EEC) EE may not be attractive as it is not straightforward, and
achieving it may involve  combination of measures and technical and financial
understanding It may also involve developing an effective plan for the efficient
utilisation of energy Nevertheless, according to  report by the International
Energy Agency (IEA, 2018), it is becomingly increasingly clear that EE can bring
many significant economic and environmental benefits The energy savings brought
about by EE improvement strategies can yield  range of benefits The benefits of
holistic and effective EE plans can be summarised as follows: () Efficient
utilisation of energy will improve the self-sufficiency of the energy supply
and, hence, energy security Efficient utilisation of electricity will delay the
planting up of power plants and, hence, reduce the financing burden on the
nation and improve the energy economics () () Government policies and energy
plans on energy EE will help business organisations improve their energy
performance, thus reducing both energy consumption and costs, which can
translate into improved productivity, eventually resulting in improved national
energy intensity 70 () Efficient utilisation of energy will help improve the
availability of electricity as the available power supply capacities can reach
out to  greater proportion of the population In addition, savings in electricity
can delay the planting up of new power plants, which can translate into savings
in the financing costs of investments for new power plants () An overall
reduction in national energy intensity will make positive contributions toward
reducing the depletion of energy resources and mitigating the effects of energy
use, such as reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and global warming
According to the IEA, EE is ‘the first fuel’ Strong EE policies are vital for
achieving the key energy-policy goals of reducing energy bills, addressing
climate change, improving energy security, and increasing energy access Figure
shows  summary of the multiple benefits of energy efficiency Figure  The
Multiple Beneﬁts of Energy Efficiency Energy savings GHG emissions Aset values
Resource management Energy security Energy efficiency improvement Health and
well being Energy prices and volatility Miligating local air pollution Macro-
economic impact Industrial productivity Skilled technical employment Source:
Adapted from IEA (2017) 71 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN  Review of the current
situation Based on the historical data from 2010 to 2015, as reported by ERIA
(2016), energy consumption in Cambodia has been increasing, as illustrated in
Figures , , , and  The demand for electricity by the residential, commercial,
and industry sectors has seen  steeper rise in consumption compared with the
overall final energy consumption by all sectors Figure  shows that electricity
consumption by the residential, commercial, industry, and other sectors in 2015
was more than  times the demand in Figure  Historical Final Energy Consumption
by Commercial and Residential Sectors ,400 )    (                  ,200 ,000 800
600 400     200   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Residential FEC Commercial FEC
FEC = ﬁnal energy consumption, ktoe = kilotonnes of oil equivalent Source:
Author’ calculations; ERIA (2016) Figure  Historical Final Energy Consumption by
All Sectors in Cambodia ,000 ,413 ,500 ,140 ,966 ,917 ,000 ,733 ,449 ,500
,000 ,500 ,000 500  2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year Industri Transport
Service Residential ktoe = kilotonnes of oil equivalent Source: ERIA (2016) 72
Figure  Historical Electricity Consumption by the Commercial and Residential
Sectors 5000 )    (                      Rising trend in electricity consumption
4000 3000 2000 1000   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Electricity consumption -
commercial Electricity consumption - residental GWh = gigawatt hours Source:
Author’ calculations; ERIA (2016) Figure  Historical Electricity Consumption by
the Residential, Commercial, Industry, and Other Sectors ,000 ,398 ,000 ,244
,000 ,620 ,314    ,000 ,605 ,283 ,000 ,000  2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Year
Electricity consumption Estimated Own Used Industry Service Residential Other
GWh = gigawatt hours Source: ERIA (2016) 73 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure
shows the percentage shares of energy sources for the residential, commercial,
and industry sectors However, based on the current trend in energy demand, it is
expected that the share of electricity as an energy source will increase, as
illustrated in Figure  The share of electricity demand in 2030 is projected to
increase to about 27% from 10% in 2015 under the business-as-usual (BAU)
scenario Figure  Percentage Shares of Energy Sources for the Residential,
Commercial, and Industry Sectors in 2015 14% 10% 67% % Biomass % Charcoal
Electricity Diesel LPG LPG = liqueﬁed petroleum gas Source: Author’ calculations
based on the Energy Balance Table of Cambodia, Figure  Projected Percentage
Shares of Energy Sources for the Residential, Commercial, and Industry Sectors
in 2030 Under the BAU Scenario 12% % 48% % Biomass Charcoal LPG Diesel 27%
Electricity BAU = business as usual, LPG = liqueﬁed petroleum gas Source:
Author’ calculations based on Energy Balance Table of Cambodia, 74  Review of
energy demand trends  Residential sector The residential sector consumes much
more energy than the commercial and industry sectors, at about 73% of the total
energy consumption by these three sectors (residential, commercial, and
industry) in As shown in Figure , biomass was the main source of energy that
catered for the residential sector in 2015, at about 87% Electricity was next at
about %, while oil products catered to the remaining demand at % Energy demand
for the residential sector is projected to increase As shown in Figures  and ,
the energy demand by the residential sector by 2030 is projected under the BAU
scenario to reach 39 Mtoe with an annual average growth rate of % Under the
alternative policy scenario (APS), the energy demand by 2030 is projected to be
Mtoe with an annual average growth rate of % Under the energy efficiency
framework (EEF) scenario, the energy demand by 2030 is projected to be 73 Mtoe
at an annual average growth rate of % Figure  Historical and Projected Energy
Demand and Energy Sources for the Residential Sector                BAU EEF APS
BAU EEF APS BAU EEF APS BAU EEF APS 2015 2020 2025 2030 Biomass Electricity Oil
products APS = alternative policy scenario, BAU = business as usual, EEF =
energy efficiency framework, Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent Source:
Cecilya Malik, EBT Cambodia 2018, ERIA 75 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure
Historical and Projected Energy Demand for Residential Sector Under the BAU,
EEF, and APS                2015 2020 2025 2030 BAU EEF APS APS = alternative
policy scenario, BAU = business as usual, EEF = energy efficiency framework,
Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent Source: Cecilya Malik, EBT Cambodia
2018, ERIA  Commercial sector Amongst the three sectors (residential,
commercial, and industry), the total energy demand for the commercial sector is
the lowest In 2015, the commercial sector comprised about % of the total demand
of the three sectors However, the rate of increase in the projected demand by
this sector is high, at an annual average growth rate of % By 2030, the total
demand by the commercial sector is projected to increase to 29 Mtoe from 12 Mtoe
in 2015 under the BAU scenario as shown in Figure Similarly, under the APS
scenario, the total demand is projected to increase to 25 Mtoe at an annual
average growth rate of %, while under the EEF scenario, the total demand is
projected to increase to 24 Mtoe at an annual average growth rate of %
Therefore, in view of this high projected growth rate, it will be strategic and
beneficial to implement EEC plans for the commercial sector 76 Figure 10
Historical and Projected Energy Demand for the Commercial Sector Under the BAU,
EEF, and APS             2015 2020 2025 2030 BAU EEF APS APS = alternative
policy scenario, BAU = business as usual, EEF = energy efficiency framework,
Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent Source: Cecilya Malik, EBT Cambodia
2018, ERIA  Industry sector The industry sector consumes the second-largest
share of total energy demand amongst the three sectors at about 24%, compared
with 73% and % for the residential and commercial sectors, respectively However,
the annual growth rate is not as high as that of the commercial sector The
projected total demand for the industry sector is 45 Mtoe by 2030 at an annual
average growth rate of % under the BAU scenario, as shown in Figure Similarly,
the projected total demand for the industry sector is 29 Mtoe at an annual
average growth rate of % under the APS scenario, while under the EEF scenario,
the projected total demand is 24 Mtoe at an annual average growth rate of %
Although the growth rate is not as high as that of the commercial sector, it is
still important to implement EE plans for the industry sector as the total
demand for this sector is relatively substantial 77 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN
Figure 11 Historical and Projected Energy Demand for Industry Sector Under the
BAU, EEF, and APS 60 40 20 00     80 60 40 20  2015 2020 2025 2030 BAU EEF APS
APS = alternative policy scenario, BAU = business as usual, EEF = energy
efficiency framework, Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent Source: Cecilya
Malik, EBT Cambodia 2018, ERIA  Energy efficiency strategies It would be prudent
to review and interpret the energy data and trends in the energy demand before
establishing EE strategies or setting priorities for the implementation of EE
policies Based on the review of the current situation and energy demand trends
discussed above, it is important to note that the following energy situations
are prevalent in Cambodia under the BAU scenario: () Energy demand for the
residential, commercial, and industry sectors is on  rising trend () The annual
average growth rate of energy demand for the commercial sector is the highest at
% () The percentage share of electricity demand for the three sectors will
increase from its 2015 level of 10% to 27% by () The percentage share of the
biomass energy source will decrease from its 2015 level of 67% to 48% by 2030,
but the combined fuel energy sources, comprising biomass, charcoal, LPG, and
diesel, will still be significant at 73% of the total demand for the three
sectors by 78 () The residential sector consumes the largest share of energy
demand amongst the three sectors at about %, while the industry sector consumes
the second- largest share at about 23% in 2015 under the BAU scenario The share
of energy demand by the residential sector is projected to increase to %, and,
similarly, the industry sector is projected to increase to % by In view of the
trends in energy demand summarised above, policymakers may consider  holistic
and systematic approach to formulating and implementing short, medium, and long-
term EEC plans for the efficient use of various energy sources Figure 12
provides an overview of  recommended strategic framework for formulating an EEC
plan The strategic framework comprises four core strategy areas, namely, energy
economics,  social and legal framework, the environment, and an EEC
implementation structure The details are described in the following sub-sections
In order to be effective and achievable, the EEC plan should be formulated based
on  top-down approach, both from the government’ perspective and the private
sector’ perspective Nevertheless, the EEC plan should be kept simple, practical,
and cost-effective, although EE is not straightforward when compared with
renewable energy Figure 12 Strategic Framework for Formulating an EEC Plan
Energy economics Energy efficiency and conservation EEC implementation structure
Social and legal framework Environment EEC = energy efficiency and conservation
Source: author 79 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN  Energy economics It should be
recognised that EE plans will yield energy savings EE alone can deliver
substantial economic, environmental, and social benefits (IEA, 2018) The energy
saved can be translated into an energy resource for the nation as it will become
energy available for other economic activities and provide energy supply to
greater share of the population The savings in electricity consumption are even
more significant as every electricity unit of kilowatt hours saved would result
in greater savings in fuel energy from power generation Based on the outlook for
energy demand summarised above, it makes economic sense for Cambodia to embark
on EEC plans The benefits of the EEC plans highlighted in Section  of this
report will have  positive impact on the Cambodian economy It can be seen from
Figure 13 that an 11% reduction in total energy demand can be targeted under the
APS case, while  15% reduction in total energy demand can be targeted under the
EEF case in comparison with the BAU case by In other words, energy demand will
be much greater in future if Cambodia does not embark on an EEC plan now Figure
13 Historical and Projected Total Energy Demand in Cambodia Under the BAU, EEF,
and APS 10  -11% -15%              2015 2020 2025 2030 EEF APS BAU APS =
alternative policy scenario, BAU = business as usual, EEF = energy efficiency
framework, Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent Source: Cecilya Malik, EBT
Cambodia 2018, ERIA 80 The economic component of the EEC strategy would result
in promoting the growth of EEC technology, equipment, and materials supply In
addition, Cambodia will benefit from skilled manpower capacity building as
result of the EEC plan implementation, which will generate demand for upgraded
levels of skilled employment Therefore, it would be prudent to adopt strong
policies to promote and enable EE investments at  reasonable scale According to
the IEA (2018), all investment opportunities in the efficient world scenario are
highly cost-effective and would bring significant economic benefits  Social and
legal framework From the national perspective, the top-down approach is through
the government’ plan to establish legal frameworks, such as an EEC act or
regulations, which should be planned as the ‘push’ factor instead of  legal
framework to mete out penalties The objective of having legal frameworks is to
establish mandatory requirements for efficient energy management and also to
empower the department or agency that is tasked with the responsibilities for
implementing EEC plans and, consequently, achieving EE and productivity for
Cambodia For the private sector, the top-down approach requires top management
or owners of companies to undertake efficient energy management practices The
legal framework would require business operations that exceed  certain threshold
value of annual energy consumption to adopt an energy management system or
practices The results of EE practices and energy productivity will eventually
benefit business operations The top-down approach may not be applicable for the
residential sector, except for the legislative building codes, which would
require housing developers to build energy- efficient houses and apartments
Similarly, building codes will also cover the commercial sector in terms of
energy-efficient buildings In this regard, the top-down approach will be an
important strategy under the social and legal framework strategy As part of the
social strategies, it is important to create an EEC culture by incorporating EE
subjects in education curriculums and conducting EE promotional campaigns for
the public in the residential sector and awareness and capacity-building
training programmes for the commercial and industry sectors 81 CAMBODIA BASIC
ENERGY PLAN  Environment The promotion and adoption of EEC measures and
practices will enhance the achievement of  sustainable environment in Cambodia
As part of the EEC targets, the national energy intensity will improve, which in
turn will contribute towards improving the carbon emissions intensity  EEC
implementation structure The third strategy is to establish  means of achieving
EE This can be achieved in many ways, but simple and more direct ways are
recommended and summarised as follows: () Engage professional bodies and
stakeholders to incorporate energy-efficient strategies and measures in
preparing building codes for the commercial and residential sectors Engage
professional bodies and stakeholders to prepare EE standards, including minimum
energy performance standards (MEPS) and guidelines for the residential,
commercial, and industry sectors Involve professional bodies and stakeholders to
establish the labelling of appliances for the residential sector Promote and
generate an EE investment environment by  establishing  competent energy
services company (ESCO) business to facilitate and expedite the achievement of
energy savings for the commercial and industry sectors; () () ()  establishing
green building certification for the recognition of green practices, including
EE; and  providing facilities and investment tax allowance schemes for EE
projects deemed beneficial It is recommended that formulating the EEC plan
should take into consideration the following:  The plan should be cost-
effective, such that the use of existing technologies and techniques to achieve
EE would be sufficient ii The plan should be basic and simple in order to
facilitate effective implementation iii Resources need to be allocated for the
establishment of the EEC plan iv The proposed EEC plan should comprise short-,
medium-, and long-term plans incorporating EE strategies and measures as
described below 82 Short-term strategies and measures, 2019–2021 () Identify and
establish the responsible department or agency to take charge of the EEC plan •
In order to ensure the success of the EEC plan, dedicated and committed
resources need to be established The responsible department or agency will be
the custodian fully responsible for formulating and implementing the EEC plan ()
Formulate EEC structure and action plans • The EEC plan should be structured for
practical implementation with achievable targets () Engage with professional
bodies and stakeholders to formulate the EEC plans • Professional bodies and
stakeholders should be invited to participate in consultative forums in
formulating the EEC plans () Develop and implement EE promotional and awareness
programmes • Greater awareness of the benefits of EE will give  better chance of
achieving success in the EEC plans () Develop and conduct EE capacity-building
programmes • EE capacity-building programmes are important because the
commercial and industry sectors need trained personnel to adopt EE practices in
their respective workplaces () Develop an EE syllabus for education • In order
to achieve sustainability in EE, the younger generations need to be educated on
EE culture and practices () Develop EE guidelines and standards for the
residential, commercial, and industry sectors • EE guidelines and standards
provide an important link and means of implementing and achieving EE • EE
guidelines and standards should incorporate passive and active EE measures ()
Develop  labelling system for appliances • EE labelling of appliances is useful
for achieving energy savings in the residential sector • Distributors and
suppliers of appliances are recommended to be trained by the respective
manufacturers on the significance of EE labelling and energy-saving potential so
that consumers can benefit through better understanding of EE labelling •
Distributors and suppliers of air conditioners are recommended to be trained by
the respective manufacturers on the sizing and selection of air conditioners in
order to avoid the oversizing of air conditioners for all the sectors, but in
particular the residential sector, because house owners depend mostly on the 83
CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN suppliers’ and installers’ recommendations Correct
sizing and selection will help save capital costs and running costs () Develop
MEPS for equipment • MEPS specifying minimum energy performance requirements are
useful for achieving energy savings in the commercial and industry sectors (10)
Prepare building codes incorporating EE • Buildings codes are particularly
useful for achieving energy savings in the commercial and residential sectors •
Building codes should incorporate passive and active EE measures (11) Prepare
efficient energy management regulations • Efficient energy management
regulations are mandatory requirements and are key to achieving success in EE in
the industry and commercial sectors • Premises that exceed  certain level of
annual energy consumption would need to engage  qualified energy manager (12)
Initiate EE measures for government buildings • The government can lead in the
implementation of the EEC plan by adopting EE practices in government buildings
(13) Establish ESCO support services • Competent energy saving and management
services provided by ESCOs can help expedite achieving the results of energy-
saving strategies and measures Medium-term strategies and measures, 2021–2025 ()
Implement energy management systems for the industry and commercial sectors •
Energy management systems provide guidelines for systematic energy management
methods and best practices for industry and commercial sectors () Establish EE
financing infrastructure support and incentive schemes • Financial institutions
can help finance investment-scale EE projects • The government may consider
investment tax allowances and the waiver of duties for imports of EE equipment
() Establish EE recognition awards • Awards recognising outstanding and
successful EE projects in commercial and industry projects given by the
government will help promote the adoption of EE () Continue capacity-building
programmes • Capacity-building programmes should be continuous, and  higher
level of EE training is recommended 84 Long-term strategies and measures,
2025–2030 () Develop an EE legal framework • It is recommended that ultimately,
legal framework, such as the establishment of an EEC Act, is developed ()
Develop an energy efficiency indicator (EEI) system for the establishment of
benchmarking for the commercial and industry sectors • An EEI system based on
the IEA’ EEI methodology (IEA, 2014) should be established () Incorporate EE
into the education syllabus • For  long-term and sustainable strategy, Cambodia’
education system should incorporate EEC concepts and practices into its syllabus
Figure 14 Suggested EEC implementation structure Establish EEC custodian
Formulate EEC plan and implement action plans  Engage with stakeholders and
professional bodies Establish EEC guidlines, standards, labelling, MEPS
Establish legal framework: EEC Act, regulations  Promote an EE business-friendly
environment  EE = energy efficiency, EEC = energy efficiency and conservation
Source: Prepared by the author 85 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN  Recommendations
Strong EE policies are vital for achieving the key energy-policy goals of
reducing energy bills, addressing climate change, improving energy security, and
increasing energy access The economic benefits for the implementation of an EEC
plan have been highlighted, and the implementation of an EEC plan is highly
recommended, which is in line with most other ASEAN countries’ aspirations and
also the IEA’ recommendations  The recommended strategic framework for
formulating and implementing an EEC plan is based on four simple, cost-
effective, and practical core strategy areas: energy economics,  social and
legal framework, the environment, and an EEC implementation structure The
economic component of the EEC strategies would result in promoting the growth of
EEC technology, equipment, and materials supply In addition, Cambodia will
benefit from skilled manpower capacity building as  result of the EEC plan
implementation, which will generate demand for upgraded levels of skilled
employment  Based on the outlook for energy demand, it makes economic sense for
Cambodia to embark on an EEC plan Energy consumption can be reduced in future
demand if Cambodia embarks on an EEC plan now  Short-, medium-, and long-term
EEC strategies and measures are recommended for implementation in stages, which
can be adjusted to suit needs and resource allocations The EEC plan should be
simple, practical, and cost-effective, and it should also be formulated based on
top-down approach, both from the government’ perspective and the private sector’
perspective In summary, this recommended EEC plan has identified the needs,
means, and action plans to achieve EE and energy savings besides the economic
benefits for Cambodia 86 References Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and
East Asia (ERIA) (2016), Cambodia National Energy Statistics Jakarta: ERIA
International Energy Agency (IEA) (2014), Energy Efficiency Indicators:
Essentials for Policy Making Paris: IEA IEA (2017), Energy Efficiency Indicators
Highlights Paris: IEA IEA (2018), Energy Efficiency 2018: Analysis and Outlooks
to 2040, Market Report Series Paris: IEA 87 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN CHAPTER
ENERGY SECURITY  Current situation of energy security in Cambodia  sustained
population and economic growth in Cambodia are the key drivers in significantly
increasing energy demand to more than double for both primary and final energy
demand during 2015–In absolute terms, Cambodia’ primary energy supply is
projected to increase from 02 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe) to 24 Mtoe
during the period, while final energy demand is also expected to rise from 93
Mtoe to 77 Mtoe (Kimura and Han, 2019) The strongest growth in final energy
consumption is likely to occur in the transportation and industry sectors, with
average growth rates of % and %, respectively Cambodia’ electricity demand is
projected to have strong growth, with an average annual growth rate of % between
2015 and The fastest growth in electricity generation will be in hydropower (%
per year), followed by coal (% per year) Generation from oil-fired power plants
will decrease considerably due to high fuel costs In the past, until 2001,
almost 100% of electricity generation came from oil-fired power plants In 2002,
hydropower plant started operation in Cambodia, and by 2013, its share in the
power generation mix had increased to % Coal power generation was also
introduced to Cambodia rather late, in By 2015, the share of coal in the power
generation mix had risen to %, the highest share in the power generation mix
Cambodia has  very high import dependency as the country relies heavily on
imports of coal, oil (petroleum products), and electricity To fuel economic
growth, Cambodia continues to increase imports of these fossil fuels, which puts
pressure on energy security Cambodia’ import dependency increased from 50% to
almost 60% during 2013–The increase in energy demand in Cambodia will also see
an increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from the combustion of fossil
fuels It is projected that CO2 emissions will increase by % per year from 96
million tonnes of carbon in 2015 to 62 million 88 tonnes of carbon in 2040 under
the business-as-usual scenario Oil and coal are the largest sources of carbon
emissions The increasing energy demand in Cambodia poses  threat to supply
security Yet, oil stockpiling and other security measures are yet to be
developed to cope with an unexpected supply disruption as they may arise from
external factors, such as conflict in the Middle East, natural disasters,
accidents, or terror attacks on oil supply cargo Almost 80% of oil exports from
the Middle East are bound for Asia So far, piracy and armed robbery have played
role in disrupting the free movement of vessels, causing delays, financial
losses, and even loss of life Data from the International Maritime Bureau of the
International Chamber of Commerce reveals that globally, acts of piracy and
robbery at sea have declined over the past  years However, piracy incidents in
Southeast Asia and South Asia are either rising or continuing unabated, which
could pose threats at any time to the supply security in the region, including
Cambodia Besides the oil supply security risks, Cambodia is affected by tropical
weather, with plentiful rainfall that results in floods almost every year
Flooding is the major natural disaster in Cambodia, especially in the lower
Tonlé Sap basin and the lower Mekong River provinces The significant probability
of flooding, combined with the relatively underdeveloped state of the road
system in the country, results in the risk of oil supply disruption, especially
the supply transported by lorry This was evident when Typhoon Ketsana hit the
country in Extreme weather, as Cambodia has become increasingly vulnerable to
climate change, typhoons, and flooding, could possibly damage not only roads but
(in an extreme case/scenario) could possibly damage the Sihanoukville port and
railways, which could prevent oil transportation to major parts of Cambodia In
such an extreme but plausible case, it may take at least  month before oil
transportation could be resumed normally as Cambodia does not have any strategic
oil stockpiling to address the supply shortage during an oil supply disruption
Oil supply in Cambodia has been undertaken by private companies such as Chevron,
Total, and PTT, as well as Cambodian suppliers like Sokimex and Tela Based on
government regulations, these companies are supposed to hold inventory of
(operational) oil stock at the terminals for about 30 days However, these oil
importing companies, in reality, may hold operational oil stock of only about
15–20 days as the country does not have  mechanism in place to monitor the
petroleum product stock holdings of these companies The government’ imposition
on companies to hold inventory oil stock of about 30 days will require these
companies to invest more in oil facilities, to which oil-importing companies may
not comply with without government inspection and monitoring systems in place
Notably, the government is aware of these energy security issues, especially for
oil supply security The government has been working on improving road conditions
and developing 89 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN other forms of transport such as
railways and barges to diversify the modes of oil transportation The government’
efforts for the improvement of the disaster forecasting system, as well as
emergency schemes for distributing fuel by various transport modes, are seen as
move in the right direction to reinforce oil supply resilience in the country
The current development of the oil refinery in Sihanoukville by Cambodian
Petrochemical Company, with outsourcing of the construction contract to the
state-owned Chinese National Petroleum Company, is to be completed by 2019, and
the expected domestic oil production developed by KrisEnergy Ltd, the operator
of Cambodian’ offshore Block  in the Gulf of Thailand, will likely increase
Cambodian energy security in the near future The government is making efforts to
develop energy infrastructures, such as oil refineries, and tap domestic oil
production by 2020, but Cambodia may still face many challenges regarding how to
manage resources effectively, which could threaten energy security, as well as
the need to have adequate energy policy in both downstream petroleum products
regulation and upstream resource extraction While Cambodia is expecting
indigenous oil production with the completion of its oil refinery by the end of
2019, the current energy security of Cambodia remains weak, with rising oil
imports to meet the growing energy demand in the country The energy security
situation is worsening from the viewpoint of the lack of fuel diversification in
the energy mix For power generation, Cambodia mainly relies on hydropower and
coal-fired power generation for its cities and provinces that are connected to
the national grid However, the electrification rate remains  critical issue for
Cambodia, as about 40% of the population does not have access to electricity
Biomass remains  dominant source of energy for cooking in most rural parts of
Cambodia Thus, all these daunting issues of inaccessibility to commercial energy
use contribute to energy insecurity In addition, Cambodia has its Law on
Disaster Management for Flood and Drought but not  law for an energy emergency
response during the disruption of the energy supply Given the background of the
energy landscape of Cambodia, it is crucial for the government and specialised
agencies to set energy security policies and provide suggested policy
recommendations to overcome the energy security challenges  Current policies
related to energy security The Government of Cambodia defined its energy sector
development policy in October Later on, this evolved to become the Power Sector
Strategy 1999–2016, with objectives to () provide an adequate supply of energy
throughout Cambodia at reasonable and affordable prices, () ensure  reliable and
secure electricity supply at prices that allow sufficient investment in Cambodia
and the development of the national economy, () encourage the exploration and
environmentally and socially acceptable development of the energy resources
needed to supply all sectors of the Cambodian economy, () 90 encourage the
efficient use of energy and minimise the detrimental environmental effects
resulting from energy supply and use This strategy guided the development and
policy framework of all energy sectors in Cambodia, including the Rural
Electrification by Renewable Energy Policy, Renewable Electricity Action Plan
2002–2012, and the energy efficiency and conservation (EEC) goals In early 2001,
the Electricity Law was passed with the aims of () ensuring the protection of
the rights of consumers to receive reliable and adequate supply of electric
power services at reasonable costs; () promoting private ownership of the
facilities for providing electric power services; () establishing competition
wherever feasible in the sector; () establishing the Electricity Authority of
Cambodia (EAC) for regulating electricity power services, granting the right and
obligation to penalise, if necessary, the suppliers and consumers of electricity
in relation to electricity generation and supply facilities; and () creating
favourable conditions for investment in, and the commercial operation of, the
electric power industry The EAC is an autonomous body set up to regulate and
monitor the electric power sector throughout the country Its duties include
issuing licenses, approving and enforcing performance standards for licensees to
ensure quality supply and better services to consumers, and the determination of
tariff, rates, and charges for electric power services that are fair to both
consumers and licensees The law also sought to promote private investment and
the ownership of power facilities and to encourage competition in the sector The
Electricity Law established the EAC as  legal public entity with the power to
act as the regulator for power sector business activities It also defined the
roles of the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), formerly known as the Ministry
of Industry, Mines and Energy The MME is responsible for the overall
administration of the energy sector It is responsible for developing policies
and strategies, power development plans, electricity trade with neighbouring
countries, major investment projects, and the management of the rural
electrification sector Along with the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the MME
is the joint owner of Electricité du Cambodge (EDC) EDC was established in 1996
and became  state-owned company with the responsibility to generate, transmit,
and distribute electricity throughout Cambodia Its main functions are supplying
electricity, developing the transmission grid, and facilitating the import and
export of electricity to and from neighbouring countries Independent power
providers are private companies that have received  license from the EAC to
generate electricity for public consumption They generate electricity and sell
it on to EDC, which then distributes it through the national grid 91 CAMBODIA
BASIC ENERGY PLAN In 2006, the government approved the Rural Electrification by
Renewable Energy Policy Its main objective is to create an enabling framework
for renewable energy technologies to increase access to electricity in rural
areas The policy acknowledges the Master Plan Study on Rural Electrification by
Renewable Energy in the Kingdom of Cambodia as the guiding document for the
implementation of projects and programmes The Master Plan envisions the
following: () to achieve  100% level of village electrification, including
battery lighting, by 2020; and () to achieve  70% level of household
electrification with grid-quality electricity by In addition, Cambodia aims for
15% of rural electricity supply from solar and small hydro by The Master Plan
also lays out clear targets, investments, and responsibilities About 83 million
households are to be connected to the national grid by An additional 260,000
households in very remote areas – too far from the planned grid extension – will
be supplied through isolated mini-grids using diesel-generated power and/or
renewable energy (220,000 households) and solar home systems (40,000 households)
The total cost for expanding the rural grid is estimated at US$37 billion In the
plan, EDC will be responsible for the overall planning, development, investment,
and operation of the rural medium-voltage (22 kV) sub-transmission lines; and it
will partner with private rural energy enterprises to expand, operate, and
maintain low-voltage distribution and service lines (< kV) The EEC goals
submitted to the 5th East Asia Summit Energy Ministers Meeting, held on 20
September 2011 in Brunei Darussalam, state that the country uses final energy
demand as the energy efficiency (EE) indicator and aims at  10% reduction from
the business-as-usual scenario by The action plans to achieve the EEC goals
cover the use of energy by the industry, transport, commercial, and residential
sectors, such as the introduction of energy efficient equipment and EE labelling
as well as the promotion of EE awareness amongst the public  Setting up energy
security policy Securing the energy supply with affordable prices and
environmentally sustainable energy uses is the main objective of Cambodia’
overall vision for energy policy However, Cambodia has experienced rapid growth
of energy demand, higher oil import dependence,  growing share of coal use for
meeting electricity demand, and, thus, greater challenges to energy security and
CO2 emissions towards These could threaten the stable supply of energy with
affordable prices at the national and local levels Thus, Cambodia needs to be
well-prepared for possible oil supply disruptions and enhance EE, reduce oil
demand, particularly in the transport sector; engage in the clean 92 use of
fossil fuels; and promote energy diversification to such sources as natural gas
and renewable energy Any measures to strengthen Cambodia’ energy security could
be more efficiently and effectively pursued by regional collaboration (any
mechanism of bilateral and regional energy cooperation), which includes
coordinated emergency response measures, cross- country energy interconnections
(Mekong subregion power connectivity), and the harmonisation of energy-related
standards and the regulatory environment for energy industries Pursuing energy
security policies also requires capacity building and enhanced awareness by the
general public Specific actions towards addressing energy security for policy,
institution, and energy infrastructure investment are vital for addressing the
key salient policies for energy security in Cambodia  Policy recommendations •
As Cambodia is expected to have stable economic growth in the medium-to-long
term, in which the industry sector will play  major role in contributing
significantly to GDP, the country will need  stable, reliable, and affordable
energy price to ensure that Cambodia is competitive in the global market In this
regard, the country may need to establish an institution, such as  national
emergency strategy organisation, to deal with energy supply disruption in the
future • The Cambodian government may consider establishing hard infrastructure,
such as oil stockpiling by the government, on top of what oil importing
companies hold in inventory oil stock of 30 days of net imports Having oil stock
is significant for ensuring that important industries and sectors, such as the
healthcare, food, and electronics industries, are well protected during an
emergency response to an energy supply disruption However, having  stock of oil
is  good signal to investors, and it could attract more important investment to
Cambodia, such as in electronics and other sectors, as these will require
stable energy supply without blackouts, and energy input is key to overall
production costs to ensure Cambodia’ industries remain competitive for products
produced outside of Cambodia The government should note that having an oil stock
is good for energy security, but the effects could also increase the price of
petroleum products, which could affect industry and other sector competitiveness
as these sectors may use petroleum products as inputs of production 93 CAMBODIA
BASIC ENERGY PLAN • Policymakers may need to develop energy policies to shelter
the country from potential risks by bringing energy resiliency through
appropriate energy policy and energy infrastructure investment, such as for oil-
receiving terminals, ports, pipelines, and strong electricity grids • As
Cambodia only has an operational oil stock of 30 days, other response measures
during an oil disruption may be need to be considered, such as () demand
restraint measures, which can range from being light-handed (, public
information campaigns to promote voluntary actions) to more medium- and heavy-
handed measures (, driving restrictions or fuel rationing) These measures can be
applied differently across various sectors, but road transportation is commonly
targeted due to the high proportion of oil consumption it represents; (ii) fuel-
switching measures, which comprise the substitution of one form of fuel for
another (, natural gas is  possible alternative to oil in the event of an oil
disruption, particularly in those power generators capable of operation using
either fuel; (iii) surge production measures, comprising the rapid activation
(within 30 days) of spare crude oil production capacity to increase oil supply;
and (iv) fuel specification measures, such as environmental or quality
standards, which can be temporarily relaxed by governments to increase the
flexibility of supply • In addition, Cambodia could see huge energy savings in
the transformation sector if policies are formulated to ensure that new fleets
of power generation be deployed for high efficiency and low-emission power
generation Currently, coal-fired power plants are deployed in Sihanoukville
based on sub-critical technology as these plants are installed with  small
capacity (50–100 MW) in which high-efficient technology such as Ultra Super
Technology cannot be used unless the installed capacity is at least 400– 500 MW
In addition, low technology, such as sub-critical technology, is relatively
cheaper in terms of capital cost, and, thus, Cambodia may opt for low technology
However, this low technology is associated with low efficiency, high CO2
emissions, and other pollutants, such as sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, and
particulate matters, which could threaten the health of residents living near
the plants, and acid rain could be  serious problem in the future • Collective
measures and actions to rapidly develop and deploy EE and savings in all sectors
and double the share of renewable energy, such as off solar, wind, and biomass
power generation, in the overall energy mix for inclusive and sustainable
development are highly recommended as  holistic approach 94 • Finally,
electrifying Cambodia to the 100% electrification rate is  must and urgent as
many households still cannot access commercial energy Thus, appropriate energy
policies to promote distributed energy systems, either using fossil fuel power
generation or renewable energy, are highly recommended to ensure that remote and
mountainous areas are able to access electricity as this energy is important for
their day- to-day needs The lack of this energy will affect their health, the
capital formulation of children, and other businesses-related opportunities
Reference Shigeru,  and  Phoumin (2019), Energy Outlook and Energy Saving
Potential in East Asia Jakarta: ERIA 95 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN CHAPTER
ENERGY OUTLOOK  Future trend analysis by 2030 The Basic Energy Plan (BEP)
outlook considers not only the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario but also the
alternative policy scenario (APS), consisting of the energy efficiency and
conservation (EEC) scenario (APS1) and the development of more renewable energy
(APS2) These two scenarios were based on the policy intervention assumed for the
BEP Under APS1, the assumption is to reduce total final energy consumption
(TFEC) in all sectors by 10% by the year 2030 relative to the BAU Under APS2,
the BEP sets the generation share from fossil-fuelled plants to be 35% in 2030,
while hydro is 55% and other renewable is 10% The APS will be the combination of
APS1 and APS2  Total primary energy supply by energy Under the BAU, Cambodia’
total primary energy supply (TPES) is projected to increase to almost 13 million
tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe) in 2030 at an average rate of almost % per year
(Figure ) Fossil fuels will still dominate Cambodia’ future TPES with  share
increasing to 60% in The increasing share of fossil fuels in the TPES is due to
the rapid increase of coal consumption in the country, particularly for power
generation Oil consumption will also continue to increase in the future due to
the growth in the number of cars and motorbikes The rate of increase, however,
will be slower than it was during 2010–Consequently, the share of oil in the
TPES will decline to 30% in 96 Under the APS, the TPES will grow more slowly at
around % per year, increasing to Mtoe in The share of non-fossil fuels will be
dominant in the APS (52% in 2030), while the fossil fuel share will fall to 48%
in Non-fossil fuels are dominant in the TPES of the APS compared to the BAU
because of the BEP assumption in APS2 The BEP sets the shares of hydro and
renewable in total power generation at 55% and 10%, respectively The remaining
share of power generation in APS2 will come from coal (35%) Figure  Primary
Energy Supply, BAU and APS 14 13 12 11 10 10 10 10           BAU APS BAU APS BAU
APS 2020 2025 2030 Electricty ,01 ,19 ,00 ,02 ,01 ,00 Other renewable ,01 ,01
,03 ,04 ,03 ,06 Biomass ,41 ,24 ,55 ,34 ,66 ,46 Hydro ,33 ,34 ,35 69 ,38 ,95 Oil
,83 ,56 ,26 ,96 ,78 ,28 Coal ,25 ,73 ,82 ,93 ,81 ,70 Total ,84 08 11,02 ,98
12,67 10,46 APS = alternative policy scenario, BAU = business as usual, Mtoe =
million tonnes of oil equivalent Source: Author’ calculations The coal supply in
the TPES will be around  Mtoe (%) lower than in the BAU in 2030, while oil and
‘others’ will be lower by only % ( Mtoe) and % ( Mtoe), respectively The
reductions in oil and ‘others’ in the TPES of the APS are not as much as for
coal because the majority of these resources are consumed by the final sectors,
not the power sector ‘Others’ covers biomass, solar, wind, and electricity net
trade Hydro in the APS will be  times higher than in the BAU (% or  Mtoe)
Overall, the total saving for the TPES between the BAU and the APS in 2030 will
be around  Mtoe or % 97 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN  Total final energy
consumption by energy and sector Under the BAU, the TFEC in Cambodia is
projected to increase at an average rate of % per year to around  Mtoe in 2030
(Figure ) Amongst the other sectors, the strongest growth in the future will be
in the ‘others’ sector, which consists mostly of the commercial and residential
sectors, since the consumption of electricity in these sectors will increase
rapidly in the future The transport sector will still dominate Cambodia’ future
TFEC and also grow rapidly but at  slower rate than the ‘others’ sector Under
the APS, the TFEC will grow more slowly at % per year, increasing to  Mtoe in
Similar to the BAU, the ‘others’ sector in the APS will have the fastest growth
rate, followed by the transport sector Final energy demand savings between the
APS and the BAU in 2030 will amount to  Mtoe (Figure ) The bulk of the savings
are expected to occur in the ‘others’ sector ( Mtoe), followed by the transport
sector ( Mtoe) and the industry sector ( Mtoe) Improvements in end-user
technologies and the introduction of energy management systems are expected to
contribute to the slower growth rate of consumption in all sectors Figure  Final
Energy Consumption by Sector, BAU and APS 10 ,   ,  ,  ,  ,   ,             -
BAU APS BAU APS BAU APS 2020 2025 2030  Industry Transport Other sectors Non-
energy Total APS = alternative policy scenario, BAU = business as usual, Mtoe =
million tonnes of oil equivalent Source: Author’ calculations 98 By type of
fuel, electricity consumption will grow the fastest, at % per year under the BAU
and % per year under the APS Although electricity will have the fastest growth,
biomass will have the highest share in the TPES (41% in 2030) for both the BAU
and the APS (Figure ) Similarly, oil will have the same share in both the BAU
and the APS at around 40% in Figure  Final Energy Consumption Share by Sector
and Fuel, BAU and APS 100% 90% 80% 50,% 49,% 45,% 41,% 41,% 45,% 70% 60% 50%
18,% 18,% 15,% 15,% 13,% 13,% 40% 30% 20% 36,% 36,% 38,% 38,% 39,% 39,% 10% %
BAU APS BAU APS BAU APS 2020 2025 2030 Coal Oil Electricty Biomass APS =
alternative policy scenario, BAU = business as usual Source: Author’ calculation
Alternative policy scenario energy indicators The gross domestic product (GDP)
of Cambodia is assumed to grow at an average rate of % per year until 2030, with
population growth of % per year As shown in Figure , GDP will almost double in
the next decade (2020–2030), but the TPES will increase by only  times The TPES
energy intensity will decline, confirming that the BEP measure of  10% reduction
will be achieved by 99 CAMBODIA BASIC ENERGY PLAN Figure  Energy Indicators, APS
140 130 120 110 100 100     =     80  68  60 40 20  2020 2025 2030  TPES
TPES/POP Intensity (TPESGDP) APS = alternative policy scenario, GDP = gross
domestic product, POP = population, TPES = total primary energy supply Source:
Author’ calculation  Energy security As coal and oil will still play  major role
in the future energy mix of Cambodia, the country’ dependence on these fuels
from international market will still be significant Import dependency will
increase from 54% in 2020 to 62% in 2030 under the BAU (Figure ) Under the APS,
because of the BEPC, import dependency will decline to 49% in 2030 from 52% in
Figure  Energy Import Dependency, BAU 70% 65% 62% 60% 57% 45% 55% 50% 52% 52%
49% 45% 40% 2020 2025 2030 BAU TPES/POP BAU = business as usual, POP =
population, TPES = total primary energy supply Source: Author’ calculation 100
Monitoring of the Basic Energy Plan implementation The energy outlook under the
BEP for Cambodia provides the future magnitudes of energy demand and supply
under both the BAU and APS conditions The APS includes the energy saving target
and renewable energy expansion plans proposed under the BEP The energy outlook
under the BEP for Cambodia provides only the projected magnitudes of the future
TFEC and TPES of Cambodia Implementation of the BEP can be monitored by
collecting the actual TFEC and TPES magnitudes annually In this regard, the
Ministry of Mines and Energy of Cambodia (MME) should continuously produce the
country’ Energy Balance Table and compare it to the BEP outlook In addition to
the monitoring of the TFEC and TPES, the MME should also monitor the other
energy indicators (TPES/GDP, TFEC/GDP, TPES per capita, TFEC per capita, and
import dependency) Assessment of these indicators will assist the MME in
identifying and understanding the key drivers of trends and in prioritising
policy interventions to control energy consumption growth The indicators can
also be effective for quantifying the potential impacts and benefits of policy
interventions 101