DP/DCP/MKD/ United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for
Project Services Distr: General  December 2020 Original: English First regular
session 2021 – February 2021, New York Item  of the provisional agenda Country
programmes and related matters Country programme document for the Republic of
North Macedonia (2021–2025) Contents Page  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework……………  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………  III Programme and risk
management…………………………………………………  ………… IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………   Annex Results and resources framework for North
Macedonia (2021–2025)………………………………  20-16149X () 040121 *2016149* DP/DCP/MKD/
UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
The Republic of North Macedonia is an upper-middle-income1 country of 08
million, with high human development The country has undergone considerable
economic reform since independence to develop an open economy and is about to
open accession negotiations with the European Union  The country experienced
significant decline in unemployment rates; income distribution is becoming more
equal, but poverty rates are still high, at over 20 per cent;  further third of
the population is at risk of poverty The economy is stable, but performs below
potential, with low productivity, high inactivity5 and few incentives for
advanced technology adoption and innovation This is due to weak state
institutions,  deficient legal framework for business, inconsistent law
enforcement and accountability, and political instability  The country is ageing
quickly Out-migration and mismatch between education and market needs create
labour-force challenges  quarter of gross domestic product (GDP) is spent on
health, education and social protection, and outcomes are not commensurate
Climate change has led to frequent, intense flooding Degradation of natural
resources, poor air quality and inadequate waste management are additional
impediments to sustainable development7 The COVID-19 pandemic is expected to
reduce real GDP by  per cent in 2020, with  projected return to growth of  per
cent in  North Macedonia is  state party to  out of  core human rights treaties,
and it is aligning legislation and regulations with European Union and
international standards, especially for women and girls, children, ethnic
minorities – particularly Roma – persons with disabilities, and refugees For
example, women’ labour force participation is  third less than men’,10 and women
own just 12 per cent of agricultural land, while half of women landowners are
not active in land management11  Four documents constitute  strategic vision for
the country: () the national strategy for sustainable development; () the
Government programme for ; () the economic reform programme, and () the national
plan for adoption of European Union acquis communautaire Together, they aim for
European Union accession, sustainable economic growth, and inclusive prosperity
Sectoral policies and plans emphasize dynamic and inclusive economic growth,
high-quality health care, education and social protection, improved governance,
environmental protection and disaster risk reduction  The Government and the
United Nations system are committed to three strategic priorities and four
contributing outcomes in the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework Expected results address system weaknesses existing prior to the
pandemic and promote accelerators to recover better, including investments in
innovation, digitization, and public-sector and community resilience to prepare
for future shocks The priorities and outcomes were identified and validated with
national sector working groups comprising the Government, the United Nations
system, civil society, the private sector, academia and donors Because of
COVID-19, consultations done virtual, and the timeline was adjusted for  United
Nations, North Macedonia common country analysis for the Cooperation Framework
and the 2030 Agenda, Per capita income of $15,670, World Bank, GNI per capita,
PPP Government of Republic of North Macedonia, State Statistical Office, 2002
Census,   UNDP, Human Development Report, 2019, North Macedonia, May Human
Development Index: 759 (2018)  Common country analysis ; World Bank, Systematic
Country Diagnostic 2018, 26-Ibid   Ibid ,   Ibid ,   International Monetary
Fund, World Economic Outlook, October 2020, Statistical Appendix, United Nations
General Assembly, Human Rights Council, Report of the Working Group on the UPR:
North Macedonia, /HRC,  April, 10 North Macedonia is ranked 36 of 162 countries,
Gender Inequality Index, Human Development Report, 2019, North Macedonia 11
United States Agency for International Development/North Macedonia, Gender
Analysis Report 2019, -  DP/DCP/MKD/ parliamentary elections on 15 July Surveys
were conducted to identify people’ priorities for the future and factors driving
out-migration  The goal of the Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework is
more prosperous, inclusive and resilient North Macedonia by Success will depend
upon sustained and inclusive economic and social development (priority );
enhanced climate action, natural resources and disaster risk management
(priority ); and more transparent and accountable governance (priority )12 The
UNDP country programme will contribute to all priorities, and three of four
outcomes  The country programme builds on the unique positioning of UNDP in the
United Nations system Comparative advantages13 are: () technical expertise,
offering integrated and cross- sectoral solutions and combining policy and
regulatory advice with capacity development; () strong and agile operational
presence; () established multi-stakeholder partnerships for action on priorities
for European Union accession and the Sustainable Development Goals; and ()
trusted relations with all levels of government UNDP will engage in United
Nations joint programmes for integrated service provision, disability, climate
change, air pollution, youth, and gender equality  The UNDP integrator role in
North Macedonia comprises thought leadership,  platform approach, and
programmatic focus on innovation and resilience These will be applied to
Framework priorities and outcomes where UNDP has comparative advantage: ()
strengthening the effectiveness and accountability of institutions, particularly
at municipal levels; () job creation; () green and inclusive economic
development; and () facilitating citizen engagement in decision-making and
climate action Thought leadership UNDP will apply modern data and analytics to
join social, economic and environmental analysis to integrated approaches and
developing scenarios that address complex development problems, such as COVID-19
recovery, air pollution, corruption, and out-migration Platform approach UNDP
will convene multiple stakeholders – including start-ups, accelerators,
international financial institutions and domestic banks – to develop sustainable
solutions for national challenges Existing platforms for disaster risk
management and city innovation will be linked with regional and global knowledge
and innovation networks Innovation UNDP will scale up programme innovations,
including the Skopje Lab, the Innovation Hub, and platforms for disaster risk
management and small and medium-sized enterprises An Acceleration Lab – part of
the global network – will offer world-class expertise to addressing emerging
policy areas such as the green, circular economy and the care economy UNDP will
test new solutions to help businesses navigate the COVID-19 economy and will
inform government policies for creating sustainable, formal and green jobs
Resilience is  key theme of cooperation It encompasses more effective,
transparent governance and rule of law; strengthened social cohesion between
citizens and the Government; increased decent employment and living standards;
and  shift towards low- emission development, sustainable use of natural
resources and green jobs As  technical lead in the socio-economic response to
the pandemic, UNDP will work beyond conventional sector and ministry boundaries
system, transformation and renewal helping the Government to navigate high
levels of uncertainty Based on the common country analysis and stakeholder
consultations, there are three challenges to which UNDP will bring strategic and
value-added solutions to contribute to Framework priorities and outcomes 12
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,  UNDP,
Intercommission panel of experts, North Macedonia draft, November 2019,
35-DP/DCP/MKD/ Poverty and economic exclusion North Macedonia has made progress
towards  market economy with greater trade openness and private-sector
development However, the economy is composed of many small firms that are slow
to innovate; there is  large grey economy; and growth and productivity are
insufficient to narrow the income gap with the European Union,14 driving the
young and educated to seek opportunities abroad15 Women, young people, Roma and
ethnic minorities risk being excluded from formal-sector jobs and prosperity16
This constitutes  major loss of productivity and jeopardizes the economic future
UNDP will engage public and private stakeholders to invest in the business
ecosystem with  focus on entrepreneurship, enhanced value chains, and trade UNDP
will support businesses in navigating the economy as it recovers from the
pandemic, including digital transformation Labour market challenges call for
digital ‘up-skilling’ programmes Under the previous programme, UNDP demonstrated
its effectiveness by supporting the creation of over 13,000 formal sector jobs
and 12,000 new small businesses, accounting for 12 per cent of new companies
registered during the period, and 10 new social services serving vulnerable
groups17 Climate change and natural resource management The common country
analysis highlights significant climate change risks: land degradation, food
insecurity, floods, biodiversity loss, and damage to public infrastructure
Drinking water networks and irrigation facilities are in  state of disrepair
Waste management is inadequate, with municipal waste being disposed of in 54
non-compliant municipal landfills18 Power depends upon the burning of lignite in
outdated generators producing 70 per cent CO2 emissions19 Air pollution is
responsible for about ,600 deaths annually, with economic losses estimated at
per cent of GDP20 This highlights the critical environment-health nexus and the
need for affordable, clean energy Flooding accounts for 50 per cent of natural
disasters and 95 per cent of economic damage21 The country lacks  national
disaster-risk strategy in line with the Sendai Framework, and there are
significant challenges in complying with European Union legislation and
standards UNDP will strengthen policy frameworks and local capacities for
climate change adaptation and mitigation; efficient management of ecosystem
resources, especially water; and disaster risk reduction This will contribute to
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing coping capacities and rural
livelihoods, boosting  green and resilient recovery from the pandemic UNDP
comparative advantages were illustrated by the Strumica river watershed, which
increased land under sustainable agriculture from almost nothing to 360,000
hectares, and demonstrated capacities of national institutions to meet
commitments under the Paris Agreement with  national climate monitoring system
UNDP also “built back better”  dams,  bridges, 22 km of roads, 102 km of
riverbeds and channels, and areas affected by landslides 14 World Bank, North
Macedonia, May The grey economy accounts for up to 40 per cent of GDP 15 () The
World Bank estimates that approximately 25 per cent of the current population
(around 500,000 Macedonians) and 32 per cent of high-skilled workers have
migrated World Bank systematic country diagnostic, 16 Ibid , 17 Families at risk
of poverty; female-headed households with dependent children; unemployed;
victims of domestic violence; ethnic minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex people; people with disabilities; migrants, refugees;
people under detention United Nations common country analysis, 18 United Nations
common country analysis,  19 World Bank systematic country diagnostic,
174-Renewable energy comprised  per cent of power by 20 Ibid  21 Annual Disaster
Statistical Review, DP/DCP/MKD/ Effective, people-centred governance and rule of
law North Macedonia has grappled with improving overall governance of
public/state institutions in terms of rule of law, transparency, voice and
accountability22 Policymaking is excessively centralized, business regulations
are opaque, and civil society is marginal to service delivery There is  low
level of trust in state institutions, particularly the judiciary Public concerns
about corruption, expressed in recent perception surveys, exceed those about the
economy and jobs23 Despite efforts to increase youth participation and
volunteerism, too few young people take part in civic activities24 These
challenges reinforce inequities, with  disproportionate impact on vulnerable
groups UNDP will support strategic planning, regulatory and oversight capacities
at the central level, and municipal-level capacity development for analysis,
decision-making, budgeting and execution These changes will contribute to
transparent and accountable governance and social cohesion, and will reaffirm
government commitment to European Union accession and the fundamentals for
building trust and counteracting polarization UNDP has demonstrated expertise in
strengthening municipal governance and capacities for economic development,
service delivery, and citizen participation in the context of ongoing
decentralization25 There are opportunities to support North Macedonia in scaling
up effective solutions for European Union accession and Sustainable Development
Goals achievement: () readiness to reform public administration;26 () demands
for quality services, highlighting the need for greater municipal capacities,
including inter-municipal cooperation and digital infrastructure; () interplay
of non-communicable diseases and air pollution, illustrating the need for
stronger environmental management and low-emission development; and ()
recognition of poverty in the northern regions, calling for more inclusive
economic growth, with  focus on local, ‘green’ economic development and
increased smallholder agricultural productivity UNDP will play an integrator
role in these areas to identify policy and programme solutions and take proven
interventions to scale Based upon lessons from programme cooperation,27 UNDP
will: () strengthen the ownership and sustainability of interventions with local
governments and municipal councils, advocating for greater revenue generating
powers, increased staffing and administrative capacity; () introduce responsible
social contracting for service delivery by civil society organizations and the
private sector; () enhance gender-responsive measures across all programmes; and
() increase private sector and civil society engagement II Programme priorities
and partnerships The programme vision is for system transformation, leading to
accelerated, more inclusive and greener economic growth This will enable North
Macedonia to prosper as  cohesive, inclusive society and converge with the
European Union in terms of income and quality of life, especially for vulnerable
groups Three priorities for cooperation are aligned with the Framework and the
UNDP Strategic Plan28 In line with the UNDP COVID-19 crisis response and
recovery offer and the United Nations system strategy for North Macedonia,
programme strategies integrate pandemic response and recovery measures29 22
World Justice Project Rule of Law Index, 2019, ranks the country 56th of 126
countries 23 () Transparency International, North Macedonia, () Face-to-face
survey, Team Institute, 2019 24 FES Youth Study North Macedonia  UNDP,
Intercommission panel of experts, 25 26 European Commission, Staff Working
Document: Update on the Republic of North Macedonia, 2020 47 2020, - 27 UNDP,
Intercommission panel of experts, chapter  28 United Nations, Executive Board of
UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS, UNDP Strategic Plan, , DP 29 UNDP, Beyond Recovery:
Towards 2030, June 2020  DP/DCP/MKD/ Under priority , UNDP, with United Nations
system partners (UNFPA, International Labour Organization, UN-Women,
International Organization for Migration), will support economic development
that is risk-informed and inclusive: () UNDP will work with the Government and
business-serving organizations30 to implement policy and regulatory solutions
for an enabling business environment This will accelerate the formation and
growth of small and medium-sized enterprises and ensure their inclusion in the
formal sector Digital transformation will lead to more resilient, productive
businesses that can offer higher-quality jobs UNDP will support the ‘greening’
of value chains and ensure that the equity and gender dimensions of small
business in development policies and incentives are tailored to populations with
specific vulnerabilities () The ‘skilling’ system, including formal and non-
formal technical and vocational education and training , will be strengthened,
with more engagement of the private sector and increased access to digital
learning31 UNDP will support new occupational standards and curricula, and will
pilot innovative employment support measures, especially for women and people
who lost jobs due to COVID-() UNDP will address exclusion and strengthen the
targeting and delivery of quality social services, with  focus on persons with
disabilities, Roma and young people Mechanisms and policy measures will enable
higher activation rates for women and family members providing care services
These results will support government policy directions to increase productive
employment, raise living standards, and reform the education system32 Under
priority , UNDP, with United Nations system partners (Food and Agriculture
Organization, United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, UN-Women, World
Health Organization), will strengthen policies and implementation capacities for
climate change adaptation and mitigation, management of ecosystem resources, and
disaster risk reduction () UNDP will work with the Government to strengthen
legal, policy, and regulatory frameworks for effective environmental governance
directed toward low-emission development and multi-sector resilience to climate
change UNDP will promote system transformation pathways addressing society’
relationship with nature, beyond the environment silo This will integrate
nationally determined contributions and adaptation plans into other sector plans
and strategies for green finance and economy, urban planning and housing,
health, agriculture, and land-use planning () Solutions will be identified and
scaled up for more efficient use of natural resources and enhanced protection of
biodiversity, including improvements to farming systems in the Prespa Lake area
Measures will be evidence-based and gender-sensitive, in line with European
Union Green Deal, energy and climate policies, and global environmental
agreements UNDP will assist the country in meeting its transparency and
reporting commitments under the United Nations framework on climate change and
the Paris Agreement () UNDP will support the preparation of integrated and data-
informed disaster risk and recovery plans In line with the Sendai Framework,33
this entails capacity development to analyse disaster risks, strengthen disaster
risk governance, enhance disaster preparedness, and ‘build back better’ () UNDP
will support the rural population in increasing sustainable agricultural
production and farm incomes, focused on small-holders and especially female-
headed 30 Including Social innovation hub, StartUp Macedonia, Social Impact Lab,
Centre for Technology Transfer and Innovations 31 Such as artificial
intelligence, Internet of Things, robotics technologies in industries, business
incubators for high-tech start-ups 32 Government programme, ; United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, , 36 33 Sendai Framework for
disaster risk reduction ,   DP/DCP/MKD/ households, through strengthened
agriculture and rural development strategies and promotion of agri-business
value chains These results will support government policy directions to shift
the energy sector to  low-carbon development path and reduce air pollution34
Under priority , UNDP, with United Nations system partners (Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, United Nations Children’ Fund, UN-Women,
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights) will support more effective
public administration and transparent and accountable governance () UNDP will
work with governments at all levels, civil society, and private-sector partners
to strengthen strategic planning, regulatory, and oversight capacities for
transparent policy design and budgeting UNDP efforts will focus on effective
fiscal decentralization and enhanced public financial management, and will
support implementation and monitoring of anti-corruption laws UNDP will support
the preparation of gender-sensitive, risk-informed response and recovery
measures that reach beyond the health sector to include municipalities and other
sector stakeholders This will assist North Macedonia in preparing for future
crises and pandemics () UNDP will develop local government capacities for
enhanced analysis, decision- making, budgeting and execution, and measurement of
policy outcomes This will include the introduction of innovative digital
technologies and mechanisms for inter- municipal planning and pooling of
resources to address regional and cross-boundary challenges () UNDP will support
legal, policy and institutional reforms related to human rights commitments35
This will strengthen rule of law, increase access to justice, create  stronger
legal environment for civil society organizations, protect the rights of
vulnerable groups, and reduce barriers for gender equality and women’
empowerment These results will support government policy directions for more
transparent and accountable decision-making, judicial reform, and  stronger
enabling environment for civil society36 The priorities for programme
cooperation form  nexus of change and partnerships These will be expanded with
digital outreach and platforms for consultation involving central and municipal
governments; parliamentarians; civil society organizations; diverse community-
based groups, including women’ rights and youth organizations; and the private
sector, including business serving organizations; and financial institutions
Linkages between the outcomes: () efforts to stimulate small business
development and increase business productivity will depend upon effective
governance reform; () governance reform, especially for budget transparency, is
essential in promoting low emission development and resilience to climate
change; () preparedness for future health emergencies and pandemics will benefit
from UNDP experience in disaster risk reduction For all priorities, UNDP will
advocate to address gaps in legislative and institutional frameworks related to
international gender equality commitments III Programme and risk management This
country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels
with respect to country programmes is 34 Government programme, ; United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, , 41 35 Partners: Parliament;
Ministry of Justice; law enforcement agencies; the Ombudsman; State Audit
Office; Commission for Prevention and Protection against Discrimination 36
Government programme, ; United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework, , 45  DP/DCP/MKD/ prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies
and Procedures and Internal Control Framework The Harmonized Approach to Cash
Transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
organizations to manage financial risks The programme will be nationally
executed under the coordination of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs UNDP will
continue to provide implementation support services at the request of the
Government If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution
for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure The
Harmonized Approach will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United
Nations organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions and
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the concerned projects UNDP will participate in Government-United Nations
coordination mechanisms, including the Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework Joint Steering Committee Programme and project boards will be
established in line with the Social and Environmental Standards and
Accountability Mechanism  partnerships and resource mobilization strategy will
be developed New sources of finance will be identified, including blended
finance and other flows for Sustainable Development Goals-related country
priorities Since North Macedonia is an upper-middle-income country, the
Government will contribute 75 per cent of UNDP local office costs37 Risks for
programme cooperation are: () possible changes in the process and requirements
for European Union accession, and potential impasse around the economic reform
programme; () unfavourable global economic and trade trends; () further
deterioration of public trust in the Government and disruptions to social
cohesion; () major talent and labour gaps created by population ageing and out-
migration; and () natural hazards and insufficient institutional and local
preparedness to respond Each of these risks is worsened by the COVID-19
pandemic, with its strain on health systems, governance, economy and society
Risk management will involve: () cross-sector coordination and partnerships; ()
impartial Sustainable Development Goals-based advocacy and policy dialogue; ()
cost- sharing with government and alternative financing and funding options; ()
regular results monitoring; and () review and updating of contingency plans for
disasters and emergencies IV Monitoring and evaluation Monitoring and evaluation
will be carried out based on the outcome and output indicators in the results
and resources framework, aligned with indicators related to European Union
accession and the national indicator framework for the Sustainable Development
Goals This demonstrates  clear linkage between the support provided by UNDP, the
Framework outcomes, and sustainable development results Data for baselines and
targets will be disaggregated by sex, area, income, and sub- populations,
especially vulnerable groups The programme will reinforce innovative tools to
manage data collection and analysis at the country programme outcome and output
levels Good practices and lessons learned from national and international
sources will shape policy advice, advocacy, and project design and
implementation Evaluations will be pursued for accountability and learning
Emphasis will be on national ownership and capacity development in evaluations
An independent evaluation of the country programme will be conducted in 37 DP
DP/DCP/MKD/ Annex Results and resources framework for North Macedonia ()
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: European Union membership, accelerated economic
growth, sustainable development, modern education, care for all Reform package
No  Economy () Invest in workforce development, job readiness, and labour market
information systems; () Support access of firms to finance; () Reduce labour
restrictions European Union acquis chapters: Agriculture and rural development;
Social policy and employment; Entrepreneurship and industrial policy; Education
and culture Reform package No  Human capital () Strengthen the quality and
relevance of education; () Achieve gender parity in employment European Union
acquis chapters: Education and culture, Social policy and employment United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP: Inclusive prosperity Outcome  By 2025, the living standard of all people
in North Macedonia is improved through equal access to decent work and
productive employment generated by an inclusive and innovative business
ecosystem RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES:  Eradicate poverty in all its forms
and dimensions;  Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development UNSDCF OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND
FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME
OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines, targets38) MAJOR PARTNERS /
PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS INDICATIVE RESOURCES BY OUTCOME ($)  Indicator: Annual
growth rate of real GDP per employed person Baseline: -  (2019) Target:
Regular: $680,000 Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (MLSP) Cabinet of Deputy
Prime Minister responsible for Economic Affairs Employment Service Agency (ESA)
Ministry of Education and Science (MES) State Statistical Office (SSO) National
Fund for Innovation and Technology Development Ministry of Economy (MOE)
Municipalities; Civil society organizations (CSOs) Academia Source: State
Statistical Office (SSO) Frequency: Annual Output  Solutions introduced to
accelerate small and medium enterprise (SME) creation and strengthen value
chains for decent work and innovation Other: $11,785,142 Indicator : No full-
time jobs created with UNDP cooperation Baseline: Total: 13,065; Male: ,411;
Female: ,654; Young people,  years (YP): ,290; Roma: 409; People with
disabilities (PWD): 216 Target: : 14,500; : ,200 ; : ,300 YP: ,000 ; Roma: 600;
PWD: 350 Data source: ESA, UNDP Indicator : No part-time jobs created with UNDP
cooperation Baseline: : ,559; : 447; : ,112; YP: 983; Roma: 76; PWD:10 Target: :
,160; : 860; : ,300; YP: ,500; Roma: 220; PWD: 30 Data source: ESA, UNDP
Indicator : No SMEs created, formalized or supported with UNDP cooperation
Baseline: 12,558 Target: 13,100 Data source: ESA, UNDP  Indicator: Global
Competitiveness Index  Baseline: points (2019); rank 82 Target: Rank 67 Source:
World Economic Forum Frequency: Annual 38 Targets here and below are
provisional, pending finalization of government plans and enterprise resource
planning  DP/DCP/MKD/ Indicator : No value chains strengthened with UNDP-
supported business services Baseline:  Target:  Data source: UNDP  Indicator:
Employment rate (%) Baseline: Source: SSO; Labour force survey Frequency: Annual
Output  Unemployed, including vulnerable groups, enjoy  supportive environment
and increased access to employment measures and  more dynamic skilling system
Total: 59, Female: 48, Male: 69, Youth (): 34,% Youth female: 28,% Youth male:
40,% Indicator : No people benefiting from employment activation and support
services Baseline: : ,715; : ,037; : ,678; YP: ,557; PWD: 40; Roma: ,037 Target:
: ,000 ; : 3500; : ,500; YP: ,500; PWD: 290 Roma: ,500 Data source: ESA, UNDP
Indicator : No end-beneficiaries with access to social services Baseline: :
53,250; : 25,713; : 27,537 ; PWD: ,064; Target: : 60,000; : 30,000; : 30,000;
PWD: ,000 Data source: ESA, UNDP Indicator : No beneficiaries having completed
training programmes per employers’ needs Baseline: ,163 Target: ,163 Data
source: ESA, UNDP Target: Total: 63,12 Female: 49, Male: 74, Youth (): 34, Youth
female: 28, Youth male: 41,  Indicator: Percentage of young people ( years)
neither in employment, education or training Baseline: Source: SSO; Labour force
survey Frequency: Annual Output  Enhanced policy and regulatory measures
developed to address exclusion and strengthen targeting and delivery of social
services for vulnerable groups, including those in the care economy Total: 24,%
Female: 28,% Male: 20,% Indicator : No policy papers developed on inclusive
social service delivery and monitoring Baseline (current cycle): 10 Target: 20
Data source: UNDP Indicator : No new models and tools introduced to promote
inclusion and innovation in business ecosystem Baseline:  Target: Total: 22%
Female: 28,% Male: 20% 10 DP/DCP/MKD/ Target: 16 Data source: UNDP Indicator :
No new services designed to support employment activation of long- term
unemployed and vulnerable populations Baseline: 14 Target: 20 Data source: UNDP
Indicator : No response and recovery measures to address COVID-19 and other
shocks that affect the economy implemented, with support from UNDP Baseline
(2020):  Target: 15 Data source: UNDP NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Environmental
protection and green development Reform Package No : Green Energy () Shift the
energy sector to  low-carbon development path, () comprehensive approach to
reducing air pollution European Union acquis chapters: Energy; Environment
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Climate action and environmental sustainability
(outcome ) By 2025, people in North Macedonia benefit from ambitious climate
action, sustainably managed natural resources and well-preserved biodiversity
through good environmental governance and disaster-resilient communities RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development;  Build resilience to crises and shocks Source: MOEPP (3rd biennial
update report) Frequency: Periodic  Indicator: Greenhouse gas emissions (Gg CO2)
Baseline: ,021 (2016) Target: ,196 (with measures scenario) Output  Enabling
policy and regulatory environment strengthened for low-emission development and
resilience to climate change Regular: $690,000 Ministry of Environment and
Physical Planning (MOEPP) Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy
(MOAFW) Crisis Management Centre Protection and Rescue Directorate City of
Skopje National Fund for Innovation and Technology Development Municipalities
CSOs Academia Other: $39,016,810 Indicator : No policies and laws that
mainstream low-emission development and climate resilience Baseline: 10 Target:
15 Data source: MOEPP, MOAFW, MOE Indicator : Availability of clean technologies
and green jobs innovation platform Baseline: No Target: Yes Data source: Fund
for Innovation and Technology Indicator : () Availability of integrated national
adaptation plan incorporating gender-responsive strategies and disaggregated
data; () proportion of priority actions implemented 11 DP/DCP/MKD/ Baseline: ()
No; ()  Target: () Yes; () 30% Data source: MOAFW, MOEPP  Indicator: Proportion
of  country- designated total area that is protected Baseline: 10,34 (2019)
Target: 1539 Source: MOEPP, United Nations Environment Programme Frequency:
Annual Output  Solutions identified and scaled up for sustainable and inclusive
management of natural resources Indicator : No persons benefiting from locally
implemented measures Baseline:  Target: : 1400; : 700; : 700 Data source: MOEPP,
MOAFW, Ministry of Local Self-Government (MLSG)  Indicator: Degree of integrated
water resources management implementation (-100) Baseline: 33 (2020) Target: 60
Source: MOEPP; European Union progress report Frequency: Annual  Indicator:
Annual mean levels of fine particulate matter PM10 (µg/m3) Baseline: (2019)
Target: 40 µg/m3 Source: MOEPP Frequency: Annual/periodic Output  Capacities at
central and local levels strengthened to prevent and respond to air pollution
Indicator : Total emission of particulate matter PM10 Baseline: 68 Kilotons
(2018) Target: ≤ 15 Kilotons Data source: MOEPP  Indicator: INFORM risk index,
2020 (on  scale from -10, where  is very low and 10 is very high) Baseline: Low,
(2020) Target: Very low,  Source: Inter-agency Standing Committee Reference
Group Frequency: Periodic Output  Capacities at central and local levels
strengthened to identify multi-hazard risks and to plan, finance and implement
effective disaster risk reduction (DRR) Indicator : No data-informed and gender-
responsive40 DRR plans Baseline:  Target:  Data source: MOEPP, MLSG Indicator :
people benefiting from early-warning and public alert systems Baseline: :
195,000; : 97,500; : 97,500 Target: : 544,632; : 272,316; : 272,316 Data source:
MLSG, Emergency agencies  Indicator: System for integrated pest management in
place Baseline: No system in place (2020) Target: System in place and fully
functional Source: MOAFW Frequency: Periodic Output : Adverse effects of apple
farming in Prespa watershed reduced 39 National biodiversity strategy and action
plan,  40 Assessment based upon United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction, Making Disaster Risk Reduction Gender-Sensitive: Policy and Practical
Guidelines 12 DP/DCP/MKD/ Indicator : No hectares of apple production under
sustainable farming practices Baseline: 400 ha (2019) Target: 600 ha Data
source: MOEPP, Municipality of Resen Indicator : Number of households applying
sustainable farming practices Baseline: 200 (2019) Target: At least 350 Data
source: MOEPP, Municipality of Resen NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Social cohesion,
efficient good governance and strong institutions; rule of law Reform Package No
: Governance () Strengthen mechanisms ensuring freedom of the press and of CSOs;
() Increase the transparency and accountability of Government decision-making
and build public sector capabilities; () Ensure independence, accountability,
and professionalism of the judicial system European Union acquis chapters:
Justice and fundamental rights; Justice, freedom and security UNSDCF OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP: Transparent and accountable democratic governance By 2025,
people in North Macedonia benefit from improved rule of law; evidence-based,
anticipatory and gender-responsive policies; greater social cohesion; and
effective service delivery by transparent, accountable and responsive
institutions RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES:  Eradicate poverty in all its
forms and dimensions;  Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development;  Build resilience to crises and shocks  Indicator: Worldwide
Governance Indicators Baseline: 72 (2018) Source: World Bank Frequency: Annual
Output  Strategic planning, regulatory, and oversight capacities strengthened
for evidence- based, gender-responsive policy design and budgeting Regular:
$000,00 National Assembly MLSG Ministry of Finance (MOF) Ministry of Information
Society and Administration Ministry of Interior State Commission for fight
against corruption Bureau for Regional Development, State Audit Office National
Fund for Innovation and Technology Development Association of Local Self -
Governance Units Regional development centres Municipalities Ombudsman’ office
CSOs Other: $020,00 Voice and accountability Political stability and absence of
violence/terrorism Government effectiveness Regulatory quality Rule of law
Control of corruption Indicator : No strategic and policy- design documents
developed through an inclusive and transparent process Baseline: 33 Target: 50
Data source: UNDP monitoring system Target: To be determined (TBD) by end 2020
Indicator : government bodies and partners with enhanced digital data collection
and reporting Baseline: TBD (Empowering Municipal Councils assessments, 2020)
Target: TBD Data source: UNDP monitoring system and annual index of active
transparency Source: Open Budget Survey Frequency: Annual  Indicator: Open
budget index (Transparency) Baseline: Score (2019) 41 Target: >=45 Source:
Official Gazette of the Republic of North Macedonia; MOF, International
financial management information system Frequency: Periodic Indicator :
strategic documents and plans that integrate resilience concerns and are gender-
sensitive and risk-informed Baseline:  13 DP/DCP/MKD/  Indicator: The country
has  system in place to track and make public allocations for gender equality
and women’ empowerment Baseline: No (2020) Target: Yes (2025) Target:  Data
source: UNDP monitoring system Indicator : No COVID-19 response and recovery
measures implemented with support from UNDP Baseline:  Target: TBD Data source:
UNDP monitoring system  Indicator: Proportion of population who believe
decision-making is inclusive and responsive, by sex, age, disability and
population group  dology Baseline: (2020) Target: 25 Source: UNDP citizens’
perception annual survey, 2020 Frequency: Periodic Output  National and
municipal capacities strengthened to improve decision-making and accountability,
strengthen social cohesion, and deliver quality services Indicator : Use of
data-driven decision-making and evidence-based policies by Government Baseline:
Partially ensured (2019) Target: Moderately ensured Data source: UNDP monitoring
system; Annual European Commission country report Indicator : No municipalities
with service-sharing agreements per the law on inter-municipal cooperation
Baseline: 62 (2015) Target: 70 Data source: UNDP monitoring system Indicator :
No municipalities with mechanisms and tools to increase accountability and
cooperation with CSOs and the private sector Baseline: : 60; : 14 Target: : 70;
: 25 Data source: UNDP monitoring system  Indicator: Level of general
satisfaction with public services at local level, by sex and place Baseline:
2020 Source: UNDP annual survey, 2020 Frequency: Periodic Total: 07 Male: 02
Female: 12 Urban: 09 Rural: 05 Target: Total:  Male:  Female:  Urban:  Rural:
Indicator : Extent of improvement in municipal budget formulation and execution
Baseline: Revenue gap: 27%; expenditure gap: 30% (2018) Target: Revenue gap: 25;
Expenditure gap: 28 Data source: Annual report, fiscal decentralization Source:
MLSP European Institute for Gender Equality Frequency: Periodic  Indicator:
Gender Equality Index Baseline: 62 score points (2019) Target: 65 Output :
Legal, policy and institutional reforms developed to support rule of law,
protect human rights, increase access to justice, and remove structural barriers
to gender equality and women' empowerment 14 DP/DCP/MKD/ Indicator : No legal,
policy and institutional reforms developed for adoption Baseline:  Target: 10
Data source: UNDP monitoring system Indicator : No mechanisms and instruments
developed to address sexual, gender-based and domestic violence, and to increase
access to justice Baseline: 25 Target: 27 Data source: UNDP monitoring system 15