Table of Contents:  Programme rationale : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/
LSO/  Programme rationale  Lesotho is landlocked and classified as  lower
middle-income country Between 2011 and 2015, it achieved average economic growth
of  per cent and its gross national income per capita increased from $630 to
$,270, owing to the Government’ commitment to fiscal consolidation, economic
growth diversification, infrastructure and human development By 2015 Lesotho had
significantly improved literacy rates (per cent for girls and per cent for boys)
and the percentage of women in Parliament increased from 17 per cent in 2003 to
25 per cent in Lesotho improved its ranking in the World Bank Ease of Doing
Business Index from 153 in 2012 to 104 in  Despite this progress, poverty,
unemployment and inequalities have persisted Lesotho is ranked among the least
development countries with  Human Development Index of 497, ranking 160 of 188
countries About per cent of Lesotho’ estimated  million people4 live below the
national poverty line and 34 per cent below the food poverty line of 138 maloti
($30) per adult per month Inequality has increased from  Gini coefficient of 51
(2003) to 549 (2016) when adjusted for gender inequalities, placing it among the
10 most unequal countries in the world Unemployment is estimated at per cent and
is higher among females (per cent) and youth (per cent) compared to males (per
cent) HIV prevalence is estimated at 25 per cent and is highest among women aged
15–49 years at per cent Politically, Lesotho’ 51 years of independence have been
marked by cyclic instability, insecurity and fractious politics While the
Ibrahim Index of African Governance ranked Lesotho 15 of 54 countries in 2017
with  score of , the collapse of two successive coalition Governments and three
national elections between 2012 and 2017 demonstrate the extent of Lesotho’
political volatility From 2014 to 2017, Lesotho’ ranking on the Corruption
Perceptions Index slipped from 55 to 74 out of 180 countries The political
crisis in Lesotho has placed the country on the agenda of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) over the years The current Government came to power
in June 2017, with  commitment to implementing various SADC recommendations
including reforming the Constitution, Parliament, the security and justice
sectors and the public service, which are key for Lesotho’ long-term stability
and economic transformation  On gender equality, Lesotho is ranked among the top
10 best performing countries in Africa However, its ranking on the Global Gender
Gap Index dropped from 16 in 2013 to 73 in 2017, due to widening gaps in women’
political, economic and labour participation The greatest representation of
women in governance is in local government (49 per cent in 2017) Social
exclusion is highest among people with disabilities, of whom only  per cent are
employed and who have no political representation10  Lesotho is vulnerable to
effects of extreme climatic conditions characterized by droughts, floods,
frosts, hail and snowstorms Climatic changes are evidenced by increasingly
warmer conditions and lower rainfall, with significant implications for
agriculture, food security, poverty and vulnerability, as the sector accounts
for the livelihoods of 70 per cent of the of population11  Increased use of
natural resources for farming, grazing and fuel has resulted in  high degree of
environmental degradation and economic and governance challenges Lesotho has per
cent arable land and one of the lowest forest coverage rates in Africa Land
classified as degraded  World Bank, Lesotho Systematic Country Diagnostic,
Lesotho Millennium Development Goal Report, UNDP, Human Development Report
Lesotho Population Census United Nations Lesotho, Common Country Analysis 2017
UNDP, Human Development Report 2016  Lesotho Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of
Health/Lesotho and ICF International Lesotho Demographic and Health Survey
9Africa Gender Equality Index, 10 Lesotho National Federation of Organisations
of the Disabled, 11 Government of Lesotho, Country Diagnosis Report, 2017
DP/DCP/LSO/ accounts for per cent of total area12 Annual depletion of natural
resources is estimated at  per cent of gross national income and the country
loses at least  per cent of its topsoil annually due to erosion  Lesotho’ energy
balance reflects heavy reliance on biomass fuels for basic energy needs,
especially in rural areas, and on imported fossil fuels for other household,
transportation and industrial purposes13 The overall household electrification
rate is 34 per cent, with 36 per cent in urban and peri-urban areas and 65 per
cent in rural areas The potential for renewable energy resources such as wind,
hydropower and solar remains largely untapped  Lesotho has undertaken
systematic mapping to align the Sustainable Development Goals to the thematic
pillars of the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDPII) 2018–-2022, to
advance sectoral linkages and integration of the Goals into the national agenda
However, due to weak sectoral coordination, limited evidential analysis and
data, national prioritization and mainstreaming of the targets and indicators
for the Goals have not been concluded  UNDP is acknowledged as  partner of
choice for programme and resource management14 The midterm evaluations of the
country programme components15 found that UNDP made significant contributions
towards: () the acceleration of inclusive growth; () sustainable and sound
environmental management; and () governance and accountable institutions  The
evaluation found that UNDP support to accelerated inclusive growth, through
enhancing business registration processes, access to finance and development of
key sectoral policies, contributed to an improved business environment and
competitiveness In collaboration with the Government and private sector, UNDP
piloted projects on inclusive finance and entrepreneurship development which
contributed to heightened awareness of the need for inclusive private sector
development, particularly targeting women and youth Facilitation of grants for
start-up loans for entrepreneurs and women-led community groups enabled
employment and income generation UNDP assistance to sustainable and sound
environmental management emphasized strategies and interventions promoting
adaptation to climate change and increased resilience; conservation of natural
resources to secure livelihoods; and better management of risks associated with
natural disasters  National Strategic Resilience Framework has been developed in
partnership with United Nations agencies and the Government to enable Lesotho to
address the multifaceted challenges posed by climate-induced shocks Additional
funding mobilized through the Global Environment Facility (GEF) enabled Lesotho
to scale up community interventions towards climate change adaptation and
improve environmental and natural resource management Investments in renewable
energy and range and environmental management contributed to improved
livelihoods, productivity and food security The evaluation of the governance and
accountable institutions component noted that significant milestones were
attained through support to governance institutions and legislative and policy
environment Capacity-building of the Independent Electoral Commission enabled
Lesotho to hold two snap national elections in 2015 and 2017, both hailed by
observers as transparent, free and fair  joint programme with the United Nations
Capital Development Fund on strengthening the capacity of local governments
enabled the transfer of functions from central to local governments and the
provision of basic social services to communities The country also improved
mechanisms for preventing and combatting corruption through the development and
implementation of the National Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan The
legal environment assessment for HIV and AIDS strengthened the national response
to HIV/AIDS With UNDP support, the Government developed  comprehensive National
Reforms Framework and Roadmap to guide restructuring aimed at 12 UNDP, Lesotho
National Human Development Report, 13 Lesotho Energy Policy,  UNDP Partnership
Survey 2017 15   DP/DCP/ LSO/ transforming Lesotho into  peaceful, stable and
prosperous country With nearly 20,000 responses to the My World Survey and
country-wide civil society-led consultation, Lesotho had one of the most
participatory consultations for the post-2015 agenda These processes enabled
generation of evidence for policy decisions, reprioritization of unachieved
Millennium Development Goals and promoted awareness of the Sustainable
Development Goals Support to studies such as the Lesotho National Human
Development Report16 facilitated knowledge creation and development of strategic
options for inclusive and gender-sensitive economic development The ongoing
capacity-building support to the national statistics system aims to improve the
availability and use of data for effective policymaking, planning and reporting
The midterm evaluations attributed challenges in the effective delivery of the
country programme to political instability and uncertainty and the
politicization of the public service In response, UNDP is supporting
comprehensive national reforms in partnership with national stakeholders, United
Nations agencies and regional and international partners This is in line with
the Common Country Assessment’ finding that UNDP has  comparative advantage in
the areas of poverty reduction, conflict resolution, understanding development
frameworks and mobilizing partners and stakeholders around issues of inclusive
economic growth, security and environmental protection II Programme priorities
and partnerships The proposed country programme  is informed by the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, anchored on the draft NSDP II and the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2019–2023 and guided by the
UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018–The draft NSDP II prioritizes promotion of inclusive
and sustainable economic growth and private sector-led job creation to address
challenges of political instability, persistent poverty, non-inclusive economic
growth and inequality The UNDP programme is structured around three pillars: ()
governance, accountability, social cohesion and stability; () sustainable and
inclusive economic growth; and () environmental sustainability, climate change
and resilience The programme will leverage synergies with other United Nations
agencies and contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
Political stability, strong and accountable institutions and effective
legislative and governance systems are prerequisites for inclusive socioeconomic
and political transformation, sustainable livelihoods and resilience The
programme therefore proposes an issue-based approach, focusing on solutions with
substantive multiplier effects, and emphasizes engagement at local and national
levels to maximize impact The programme further advocates the development of
human rights-based policy and legal environment and strategies relevant to the
national context and capacities To strengthen its position as  thought leader on
development, UNDP will establish  multi-year research agenda and utilize
corporate Sustainable Development Goal tools to expand knowledge and evidence
for policy formulation, planning and implementation The programme builds on past
lessons and pilots and balances policy-level initiatives with concrete
interventions to create solutions to national development challenges In line
with the principle of leaving no one behind, the programme will enhance the
inclusion of women, youth and persons with disabilities in Lesotho’
socioeconomic and political processes by catalysing innovations, South–South and
triangular cooperation and sharing corporate best practices UNDP will leverage
its partnerships with the Government and cultivate new partnerships with donors,
civil society, the private sector, media and academia for programme
sustainability Governance, accountability, social cohesion and stability This
programme pillar is aligned to signature solution  of the UNDP Strategic Plan,
strengthen effective, inclusive and accountable governance, and is expected to
enhance good governance, social accountability and cohesion 16 UNDP, Lesotho
Human Development Report DP/DCP/LSO/ The first component focuses on supporting
the implementation of inclusive national reforms of the political and
constitutional systems including Parliament and the security, justice and public
sectors With funding from the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office, UNDP
will support the organization of dialogues on the reforms and national
reconciliation In collaboration with SADC, the European Union, the Commonwealth
Secretariat, other United Nations agencies and international partners, UNDP will
draw on its global expertise and South-South partnerships to provide technical
support and promote innovation, public participation and inclusion of women,
youth and persons with disabilities UNDP will continue to support capacity-
strengthening for religious leaders, civil society, media and academia for
improved facilitation, advocacy and engagement in national processes Secondly,
working with government and faith-based organizations, UNDP will support the
consolidation of national and local capacities for dialogue, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention |Complementary to ongoing support to district peace
committees, efforts will target districts with  history of violent conflict to
strengthen preventive and response capacities with deliberate focus on the
inclusion and capacity of women and youth in mediation and community
reconciliation processes Thirdly, working with the Ministry of Gender and Youth,
Sports and Recreation, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and women-led civil society organizations, UNDP
will support organized women’ groups on issues such as national reforms,
peacebuilding, conflict management, leadership, governance, gender and human
rights It will support the Lesotho Parliamentary Women’ Caucus and advocacy for
domestication of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination against Women and other protocols to bridge the gender gap UNDP
will develop  youth-focused coordination and planning mechanism to support
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 16 and related development
programmes to enhance the voice and participation of youth in socioeconomic and
political processes Finally, UNDP will support key human rights and governance
institutions to promote inclusion, transparency, accountability and access to
justice In partnership with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, UNDP will provide technical support and capacity- building
towards the establishment of  National Human Rights Commission that is compliant
with the Paris Principles and support Lesotho’ reporting on international
conventions on human rights UNDP will support the implementation of the
recommendations of the assessment of the legal environment on HIV/AIDS and the
National Action Plan on Women, Girls and HIV and AIDS In collaboration with the
German Agency for International Cooperation, UNDP will promote social
accountability and civic participation through voter and civic education and,
with other United Nations agencies, the European Union and the Commonwealth
Secretariat, support capacity-building of the public service Ongoing support to
anti-corruption initiatives will be scaled up Sustainable and inclusive economic
growth In line with signature solution  of the UNDP Strategic Plan, keeping
people out of poverty and inclusive economic growth, this pillar addresses
poverty, inequality and limited opportunities for employment and livelihoods,
especially among women, youth and persons with disabilities Lesotho recognizes
agriculture, manufacturing, technology, tourism and creative industries as key
drivers for growth and employment UNDP will promote economic participation, for
women, persons with disabilities and youth in these sectors to foster social
inclusion and equity and reduce dependence on the national Social Protection
Scheme UNDP best practices, South-South cooperation and business models will be
adopted to promote collaborative platforms towards inclusive growth Priority
will be to support government capacities for evidence-based policymaking,
analysis, planning, monitoring and reporting by facilitating the availability of
disability-disaggregated data and statistics utilizing the Washington Group on
Disability Statistics short set of disability questions The UNDP multi-year
research agenda will contribute to policymaking through policy and issue briefs,
national Sustainable Development Goal and human development reports and analysis
of the national multidimensional poverty index Complementary to the ongoing
partnership with the World  DP/DCP/ LSO/ Bank, European Union, United Nations
Population Fund and United Nations Children’ Fund on capacity-building for data
literacy and use, UNDP will promote innovations and coordination for generation,
access to and use of data As an integrator, UNDP will create platforms that draw
on the capacities of United Nations agencies in areas beyond its comparative
advantage, facilitate coordinated technical assistance and strengthen mechanisms
for Sustainable Development Goal implementation, monitoring and reporting, to
deliver impact and utilize resources efficiently UNDP will support the
Government to leverage existing and potential financial resources for the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda based on the recommendations of the financial resources mapping and
development finance assessment exercises UNDP will complement ongoing efforts of
the World Bank and African Development Bank to support  competitive business
environment and employment creation through enhanced institutional coordination
for private sector development UNDP will advocate and facilitate the institution
of the United Nations Global Compact and the Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights for  responsible business environment and private sector
contribution to the Sustainable Development Goals Working with the Ministry of
Gender and Youth, Sports and Recreation and the public and private sectors, UNDP
will promote the reduction of gaps in women’ participation and empowerment
through the UNDP Gender Seal certification UNDP will scale up initiatives on
inclusive business by promoting access to financial services and inclusive
markets for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and facilitate
their participation in public-private dialogues Lastly, through skills
development, the programme will support the generation of demand for inclusion,
especially among women, youth and persons with disabilities, and promote
behaviour change for economic transformation In partnership with the
International Labour Organization, UNDP will support research on market-
readiness skills among youth to understand the extent and impact of skills-
market mismatch and establish  database on available skills and gaps, to
facilitate the introduction of new market-relevant training programmes UNDP will
also pursue South-South cooperation for youth empowerment through the
YouthConnekt Initiative and with UNDP Lebanon to foster opportunity-seeking
behaviour through innovation, technology and information spaces, promoting
entrepreneurship and networking Support to the Ministry of Small Business
Development, Cooperatives and Marketing will also be scaled up to introduce
systems for profiling MSMEs to facilitate partnerships and mentorship for
emerging entrepreneurs Environmental sustainability and resilience to climate
change This pillar is aligned to signature solutions ,  and  of the UNDP
Strategic Plan: enhance national prevention and recovery capacities for
resilient societies; promote nature-based solutions for  sustainable planet; and
close the energy gap UNDP will work with the Government to implement the
National Strategic Resilience Framework in  gender-responsive and risk-informed
manner The programme will focus on scaling up and replicating piloted
sustainable land management models and best practices to support community
groups, women, persons with disabilities and youth in regions that are highly
susceptible to climate change impacts, environmental hazards and land
degradation Based on the findings of the study on the socioeconomic impacts of
climate change, the programme will adopt the integration of rangeland management
and rehabilitation, sustainable use of biomass and promotion of hydro, wind and
solar for energy generation UNDP will maintain ongoing partnerships with GEF and
other United Nations agencies to scale up and strengthen capacities for
implementation of integrated water catchment management programmes, focusing on
ecological zones most affected by land and environmental degradation UNDP will
partner with the Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation, Ministry of
Tourism, Environment and Culture, and community-based organizations to
mainstream climate change in national and local strategies and policies and
build synergies with the work of the European Union on climate change The
midterm evaluation of the programme component on environmental sustainability
recommended the utilization of decentralization structures to promote
stewardship and strengthen  DP/DCP/LSO/ capacities for range management and
enforcement of related laws Building on ongoing initiatives, the programme will
be delivered through empowering local farmer and grazing associations to
implement sustainable natural resource management practices and reduce their
vulnerability to disasters and climate change Eco-friendly and climate-smart
technologies and capacities will be introduced to stimulate diversification of
livelihoods and enhance household food security and incomes As  key player in
the renewable energy sector, UNDP has supported collection and analysis of
energy consumption data needed for effective planning and programming In
alignment with signature solution  of the UNDP Strategic Plan, close the energy
gap, UNDP will support implementation of the Sustainable Energy for All
initiative for the development and promotion of market-driven and affordable
solutions and private sector participation in the delivery of renewable energy
technologies The programme will support the Ministry of Energy to develop
relevant legal and policy frameworks to promote private sector investments in
renewable energy UNDP will collaborate with academic and private sector
institutions to promote research, innovations and knowledge on renewable energy
and energy-efficient technologies III Programme and risk management This country
programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as
the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment
and resources assigned to the programme at the country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to the
country programme are prescribed in the programme and operations policies and
procedures and the internal control framework National implementation will be
the default modality for the programme However, in exceptional circumstances and
in consultation with the Government and UNDP headquarters, direct implementation
will be used to safeguard and ensure UNDP accountability The harmonized approach
to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other agencies to
manage risks As per Executive Board decision 2013/, cost definitions and
classification for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the concerned projects Regular project and management audits and spot checks
will be carried out to ensure efficiency of internal controls and accountability
UNDP will work closely with the Ministry of Development Planning as the
interlocutor for development programmes in the country, other United Nations
agencies and development partners in delivering the programme in line with the
Lesotho Partnership Policy to ensure sustainability and continuity of UNDP
interventions UNDP will further leverage its internal business processes and
capacities to deepen and establish broad-based partnerships, including
engagement of potential and non-traditional donors and expansion of South–South
and triangular cooperation In tandem with the planned national reforms, the
programme will build capacities of middle managers in key partner institutions
to facilitate smooth transitioning between governments to safeguard continuity
of programmes and reduce risks associated with political instability and
frequent changes in government UNDP will continuously scan the horizon, update
the programme risk profile and utilize internal programme management structures
and independent reviews for programme and operational stability and adjustments
As  partner of choice in programme and resources management UNDP will strengthen
capacities for joint development planning, monitoring and partnerships required
for national development UNDP will explore with the Government the possibility
of supporting the delivery of under- performing loans from international
financial institutions UNDP will develop new partnership strategies aligned to
the Lesotho Partnership Policy and broaden its partnerships with civil society,
the private sector, academia, United Nations agencies, other development
partners and community- based groups for maximum impact Lesotho’ lower middle-
income status, limited donor presence and donors’ continued conditioning of
assistance on good governance could undermine resource mobilization efforts
While  DP/DCP/ LSO/ supporting national reforms as  remedy to the country’
governance challenges, UNDP will also seek to mobilize funding from bilateral
and thematic trust funds with  focus on multi-year funding to ensure
predictability and flexibility of resources UNDP will continue engagement with
the Government to mobilize resources from GEF and other sources to address the
country’ environmental and climate change challenges To enhance national
ownership of the programme, stakeholder who were engaged in the UNDAF and
country programme development processes will be maintained to enhance
stakeholder inputs into the programme and alignment to national priorities IV
Monitoring and evaluation In line with the UNDP evaluation policy,  per cent17
of programme resources will be allocated for monitoring and evaluation (&) and
will ensure systematic collection of disaggregated data to enrich the evidence
and analysis underpinning programmes, and to fill the data gaps that impede
effective targeting The UNDP gender marker will be consistently used to monitor
expenditures and improve gender-based planning and decision-making Stakeholder
participation will be promoted through joint field visits, programme reviews and
participation in project board and technical working groups In alignment with
the UNDAF, UNDP will use national data sources for reporting while strengthening
internal & capacities to enhance evidence-based management, programme
effectiveness and sustainability UNDP will further strengthen internal processes
for & to improve attributability of results, learning and inform programme
adjustments The UNDP & plan will be used to strengthen communication for results
and facilitate advocacy for programme support, policy dialogues and thought
leadership Programme outputs will be monitored on  quarterly basis and outcomes
on an annual basis and validated through  joint annual review with stakeholders
The programme will undertake thematic and project evaluations throughout the
programme cycle, and  midterm programme evaluation will be conducted after three
years of implementation UNDP will contribute to United Nations efforts to
improve accountability, effectiveness and efficiency in “Delivering as One”
through leading and participation in UNDAF pillars and collaborating with other
United Nations agencies 17 The costed evaluation plan accounts for  per cent of
the resources and  per cent will be utilized for monitoring and programme
assurance activities  DP/DCP/LSO/ Annex Results and resources framework for
Lesotho (2019–2023) NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strengthening governance and
accountability systems UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2023, government and
non-governmental institutions deliver their mandates and uphold good governance,
rule of law, and human rights, with all people having improved access to justice
and participating in social and political decision-making processes in  peaceful
environment’ Sustainable Development Goals: ,10,16,17 RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Outcome : Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development UNDAF outcome indicator(), baselines, target() Data source and
frequency of data collection, and responsibilities National Assembly Indicative
country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines targets) Major
partners / partnerships frameworks Indicative resources by outcome ($)
Capacities of government and national stakeholders strengthened to undertake and
sustain gender-responsive, inclusive and participatory institutional and
governance reforms processes Regular: $, 859,000 : Proportion of seats held by
women in the () National Assembly and () local government Office of the Prime
Minister; SADC; Peacebuilding Support Office; National Assembly; Ministry of Law
and Constitutional Affairs; Ministry of Justice, Human Rights and Constitutional
Affairs, Ministry of Public Service; Lesotho Council of NGOs; Christian Council
of Lesotho; Directorate on Corruption and Economic Offences; European Union; UN-
Women; Commonwealth Secretariat; Every  years Other: $,935,000  Proportion of
reform recommendations addressing persons with disabilities, women’ empowerment
and gender equality () adopted and () implemented Baseline: () 24 (2017); () 47
Target: () 30; () 50 Baseline: () ; ()  Target: () 30%; () % Data source:
Parliament Frequency: Annual  Proportion of women participating in sessions of
dialogue on reforms at () national and () community levels Baseline: () ; ()
Target: () 30%; () 30% Data source: National Dialogue project reports,
Frequency: Annual  Constitution-making, electoral and parliamentary processes
and institutions strengthened to promote inclusion, transparency and
accountability : Women' participation in elections: () Proportion of women in
the voter registry () Proportion of women on the governing mechanism of the
electoral management body () Benefiting from Temporary Special Measures to
ensure women’ participation and representation  DP/DCP/ LSO/ Baseline: () 56%;
() 56%; () 21 Target: () 56%; () 56%; () 25 Data source: Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC) Frequency: Every five years  Number of () national and () local
elections judged free and fair by independent observer Baseline: () ; ()
Target: () ; ()  Data source: IEC Frequency: Every five years  Civil society and
citizen have strengthened technical capacities for advocacy, public
participation, oversight and social accountability  Lesotho’ ranking on the
Economist Intelligence Unit Democracy Index Economist Intelligence Unit, Annual
Ministry of Law and Constitutional Affairs  Number of () citizen forums and ()
proposals on reforms and good governance facilitated by non-State actors
Baseline: 56 (2017) Target: 40 Baseline: () ; () ; Target: () 10; ()  Data
source: CSOs, media Frequency: Annual  Number of parliamentary hearings and
committee meetings triggered by the Private Members Bill through public
participation processes Baseline: ; Target:  Data source: Parliamentary
Committee Reports Frequency: Annual  Capacities of CSOs, communities and
institutions at national and local level strengthened for conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and social cohesion  Extent18 to which there are data-informed
mechanisms19 in place to strengthen social cohesion and prevent risk of conflict
Baseline:  (2016); 18 Scale:  – None,  – Minimal,  – Moderate,  – Largely;  –
Fully 19 Development policies, plans, strategies and institutions 10 DP/DCP/LSO/
Target:  Data source: Ministry of Development Planning Frequency: Annual
Percentage of peace committees that integrate gender consideration in their
negotiations Baseline: ; Target: 25% Data source: Catholic Commission for
Justice and Peace; Frequency: Annual  Rule of law and national human rights
institutions and systems have strengthened technical capacities to promote
inclusion, transparency and accountability  Existence of an independent national
human rights institution Ministry of Justice, Human Rights and Correctional
Services; universal periodic review; Baseline: No Target: Yes  Percentage of
human rights treaty bodies State Party reports completed and submitted Annual
Baseline: 22% Target: 56% Data source: OHCHR, Government of Lesotho Frequency:
Annual  Existence of effective measures adopted to mitigate and remedy
corruption risks at: () national level, () subnational level, () sector levels
Baseline: ()  (2017); () ; () ; Target: () ; () ; ()  Data source: Directorate
on Corruption and Economic Offence Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Enhancing inclusive and sustainable economic growth and private sector-led job
creation UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: Outcome : By 2023, government and
private sector increase opportunities for inclusive and sustainable economic
growth, improved food security, and decent work, especially for women, youth and
persons with disabilities Sustainable Development Goals: ,,,,,10,17 RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome : Advance poverty reduction in all its forms and
dimensions : Average annual earnings of female and male employees Bureau of
Statistics  National and local level institutions have enhanced technical
capacities to coordinate and facilitate effective planning, implementation,
analysis and national reporting on the Sustainable Development Goals using
innovative and data driven-solutions Ministry of Finance; Ministry of
Development Planning; Bureau of Statistics; Regular: $,490,000 Other: $,464,000
Annual 11 DP/DCP/ LSO/ Baseline: Men $288 Women $208 (2008) Target: Men $288;
Women $224  Extent to which development plans and budgets integrate
international agreements across the whole-of-government1: Ministry of Gender and
Youth, Sports and Recreation; Academia Ministry of Small Business Development,
Cooperatives and Marketing; Lesotho Chamber of Commerce and Industry; Private
Sector Foundation of Lesotho; Ministry of Trade and Industry; World Bank African
Development Bank European Union ILO () 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
() Paris Agreement () African Union Agenda 2063 Baseline: () ; () ; ()  Target:
() ; () ; ()  Data source: Ministry of Development Planning; Frequency: Annual
Extent to which there are data collection/analysis mechanisms in place providing
disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the Sustainable Development
Goals: () Conventional data collection methods (, surveys) () Administrative
reporting systems () New data sources (, big data) Baseline: () ; ()  ();
Targets: () ; () ; ()  Data Source: Bureau of Statistics; Frequency: Annual
Capacities of government institutions and private sector improved to create
competitive and gender-sensitive business environment and enable effective
economic participation of MSMEs  Proportion of working-age population that have
employment in formal and informal sectors (access to decent work), by sex and
age Labor Force Survey Every  years Bureau of Statistics  Number of gender-
sensitive policies/legal frameworks promoting employment creation adopted and
implemented Baseline: Total % (2008) Age: : :%, :% Age: : :%, :% Age: : :%, :%
Baseline: ; Target:  Data source: Ministry of Development Planning; Frequency:
Annual Target: Total % Age: : :%, :% Age: : :10%, :% Age: : :%, :%  Number of
MSMEs participating in policy dialogues for private sector development Baseline:
; Target: 100 Data source: Ministry of Small Business Development, Cooperatives
and Marketing, Basotho Enterprises Development Corporation; Frequency: Annual
Proportion of Gender Seal certification areas for private sector adopted and
implemented 12 DP/DCP/LSO/ Baseline: ; Target: 20% Data source: Ministry of
Gender and Youth, Sports and Recreation; Frequency: Annual  Capacities of
national public and private sector institutions strengthened to promote
enterprises development  Proportion of men, women and children of all ages
living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions
National Household Budget Survey Every five years  Number of start-up
enterprises in priority sectors20 () registered annually (disaggregated by age,
sex of owner and sector); and () still in business two years after registration
Baseline: % Target: 40% Bureau of Statistics Baseline: () TBD; () ; Target: ()
50; ()10 Data source: One-stop Business Facilitation Centre Frequency: Annual
Percentage of MSMEs with access to formal financial services: () bank; () mobile
money Baseline: () 48%; ()TBD Target: () 55%; () TBD Data source: FinScope MSME,
Central Bank of Lesotho Frequency: Annual  Number of new jobs created through
MSMEs disaggregated by () gender; and () age Baseline: () ,526 (Women: ,647,
Men: 879) (2017); () youth: 37 Target: () ,000 (Men: 100), Women: 400); ()
youth: 500 Data source: Project reports; Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR
GOAL: Enhancing inclusive and sustainable economic growth and private sector-led
job creation UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP#: By 2023, the people of Lesotho use
natural resources in  more sustainable manner and the marginalized and most
vulnerable are increasingly resilient Sustainable Development Goals:
,,,,12,13,15, RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome : Strengthening resilience
and shocks to crises : Proportion of degraded land FAO  Capacities of key
institutions and sectors at national and local levels enabled to scale-up and
enforce rangeland management initiatives for sustainable natural resources
management Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation, Regular: $,200,000
Annual Baseline: 88% Target: 88% Other: 20 manufacturing, technology, tourism,
agriculture 13 DP/DCP/ LSO/ $11,456,000 Ministry of Energy Ministry of Tourism,
Environment and Culture, Ministry of Water Affairs GEF Green Climate Fund
European Union Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation  Natural
resources that are managed under  sustainable use, conservation, access and
benefit-sharing regime: () Area of land under protection (hectares) () Number of
plant species managed and used under access and benefit-sharing regime Baseline:
() ,637; () ; Target: () 50,000; ()  Data source: Ministry of Forestry, Range
and Soil Conservation Frequency: Annually Watershed management framework  Number
of community groups implementing sustainable land management programmes
Baseline: 110; Target: 200 Data source: Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil
Conservation; Frequency: Annually National Resilience Framework  Number of
people benefiting from improved livelihoods interventions supported by UNDP,
disaggregated by sex Baseline: ,586 (Women: ,628, Men: 958) Target: ,000 (Women:
,407, Men: ,593) Data source: Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation,
Ministry of Energy Frequency: Annually  Number of plans and strategies for
sustainable rangeland management implemented Baseline: ; Target:  Data source:
Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Culture; Frequency: Annually  Low-emission
and climate-resilient objectives addressed in national, subnational and sectoral
development plans and policies to promote economic diversification and green
growth : Proportion of land under improved range management Lesotho Land Cover
Atlas FAO Baseline: Improved: 79% (16,129 km2), Degraded: 94% (,17 km2)  Number
of national and local plans and strategies that integrate climate resilient
objectives Baseline: ; Target:  Data source: Ministry of Energy; Frequency:
Annually Target: Improved: 79% (19,74 km2), Poorly managed: 94% (27,54 km2) 14
DP/DCP/LSO/ : Existence of targets for low emission and/or climate-resilient
development in: () development plans and strategies; () budgets; () private
sector business plans and strategies Baseline: () No; () No; () No; Target: ()
Yes; () Yes; ()Yes Data source: Ministry of Energy Frequency: Annual  Capacities
of national government and private sector strengthened to enable universal
access to clean, affordable and sustainable energy : Proportion of population
living in households with access to basic services: () energy; and () financial
services National Energy Surveys Annual : () Number and (ii) Proportion of
households using clean and sustainable energy: Ministry of Energy Baseline: ()
Total: %; () Women-headed, () Persons with disabilities, () In rural areas
Urban: %; Rural: % () Total: 22%, Target: () Total: %; Baseline: () () TBD; (ii)
TBD; () () TBD (ii) TBD; () () 56,246; (ii) 47% Target: () () ,500; (ii) % () ()
TBD; (ii) TBD; () () 57,246; (ii) 65% Data source: Energy Survey Report
Frequency: Annually Urban: %; Rural: % () Total: 61%; women: 61%  Number of off-
grid systems promoting and providing access to clean energy Baseline: ; Target:
20 Data source: Energy Survey Report; Frequency: Annually 15