                   PROCUREMENT PLAN (Mandatory Requirements)        BANGLADESH
SCALNG UP RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECT (P161869) PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AGENCIES:
Electricity Generation Company of Bangladesh (EGCB) Infrastructure Development
Company Limited (IDCOL) Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority
(SREDA)                    Period covered by this Procurement Plan: Entire
Project Period   Preamble In accordance with paragraph  of the World Bank
Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers, July 2016 revised November 2017
(“Procurement Regulations”), the Bank’ Systematic Tracking and Exchanges in
Procurement (STEP) system will be used to record all procurement actions for the
Project, including preparing, updating and clearing its Procurement Plan, and
seeking and receiving the Bank’ review and No-objection to procurement actions
as required                         This textual part along with the Procurement
Plan tables in STEP constitute the Procurement Plan for the Project The
following conditions apply to all procurement activities in the Procurement Plan
The other elements of the Procurement Plan as required under paragraph  of the
Procurement Regulations are set forth in STEP  The Bank’ Standard Procurement
Documents: The Bank’ Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs) shall be used for
goods, works and non-consulting services where international competition is
required and for all consulting services, including their respective forms of
contract       National Procurement Arrangements: In accordance with paragraph
of the World Bank Procurement Regulations, when approaching the national market,
as agreed in the Procurement Plan, the country’ own
procurement procedures may be used These procurement procedures shall be
consistent with the Bank’ Core Procurement Principles and ensure that the Bank’
Anti-Corruption Guidelines and Sanctions Framework and contractual remedies set
out in its Legal Agreement apply When the Borrower uses its own national open
competitive procurement arrangements as set forth in the Public Procurement Act
2006 and the Public Procurement Rules 2008, such arrangements shall be subject
to paragraph  of the Procurement Regulations and the following conditions:
Lottery in award of contracts shall not be allowed; ) Bidders’
qualification[]/experience requirement[] shall be mandatory; ) Bids shall not be
rejected based on percentage above or below the estimated cost; ) Model Bidding
Documents agreed with the Bank shall be used for all national open competitive
procurement; ) ) The eligibility of bidders shall be as defined under Section
III of the Procurement Regulations Accordingly, no bidder or potential bidder
shall be declared ineligible for contracts financed by the Bank for reasons
other than those provided in Section III of the Procurement Regulations; ) The
request for bids/request for proposals document shall require that
Bidders/Proposers submitting Bids/Proposals present  signed acceptance (in the
form attached) at the time of bidding, to be incorporated in any resulting
contracts, confirming application of, and compliance with, the Bank’ Anti-
Corruption Guidelines, including without limitation the Bank’ right to sanction
and the Bank’ inspection and audit rights When the Borrower uses other national
procurement arrangements (other than national open competitive procurement),
such as limited/restricted competitive bidding, request for quotations/shopping,
direct contracting), such arrangements shall be consistent with the above
requirements As per paragraph  of the Procurement Regulations, the “Letter of
Acceptance of the World Bank’ Anticorruption Guidelines and Sanctions Framework”
as attached to this document shall form part of the Model Bidding Documents
Leased Assets: Not Applicable Procurement of Second Hand Goods: Not Applicable
Domestic preference: as specified under paragraph 51 of the Procurement
Regulations as follows:  Works: Not applicable Plant/Supply and Installation:
Not applicable Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS): Not Applicable
Bank’ Procurement Prior Review Thresholds: contracts at or above the thresholds
set out in table  below are subject to the Bank’ procurement prior review Table
: Procurement Prior Review Thresholds (US$ millions) Type of procurement High
risk Substantial risk Moderate risk Low risk Works (including turnkey, supply &
installation of plant and equipment, and PPP)  10 15 20 Goods, information
technology and non-consulting services      Consulting services: firms
Consulting services: Individual     Notes:  These thresholds apply to all
procurement activities regardless of their procurement/selection methods There
is no automatic requirement to undertake prior review for direct selection for
value less than these thresholds Consultant services covers  range of services
that are of an advisory or professional nature  In addition to the provisions of
Table  above, and irrespective of the contract value, the following procurement
activities are subject to the Bank’ procurement prior review: () procurement
processes involving contract negotiations, as described in Section VI,
paragraphs , of the Procurement Regulations; () competitive dialogue; ()
sustainable procurement; () selection of probity assurance providers, as
described in Section III, paragraph  of the Procurement Regulations; and () best
and final offer  The determination of whether  contract meets the procurement
prior review threshold is based on the estimated value of the contract or the
package -when the selection document contains more than one lot/slice-,
including all taxes and duties payable under the contract  Bid/ Proposal
Evaluation Committee: EGCB requires to engage (recruited by EGCB as Consultant)
one international technical consultant (solar power plant expert) and one
international procurement consultants in their bid/proposal evaluation committee
for the procurements of solar power plant and supervision consultant/owner’
engineer Formation and alteration of the bid/proposal evaluation committee shall
be subject to Bank’ no objection Attachment  Letter of Acceptance of the World
Bank’ Anticorruption Guidelines and Sanctions Framework1 Date: [Drafting note:
This document shall be signed by bidders/proposers/consultants and submitted as
part of their bids/proposals In addition, this document shall be signed by the
winning bidder/consultant and incorporated as part of the contract]  Invitation
of Bids/Proposals No__________ To:
___________________________________________________________________________ We,
along with our sub-contractors, sub-consultants, service providers, suppliers,
agents (whether declared or not) consultants and personnel, acknowledge and
agree to abide by the World Bank’ policy regarding Fraud and Corruption
(corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive, and obstructive practices), as set
out and defined in the World Bank’ Anti-Corruption Guidelines2 in connection
with the procurement and execution of the contract (in case of award), including
any amendments thereto We declare and warrant that we, along our sub-
contractors, sub-consultants, service providers, suppliers, agents (whether
declared or not), consultants and personnel, are not subject to, and are not
controlled by any entity or individual that is subject to,  temporary
suspension, early temporary suspension, or debarment imposed by  member of the
World Bank Group, including, inter alia,  cross-debarment imposed by the World
Bank Group as agreed with other international financial institutions (including
multilateral development banks), or through the application of  World Bank Group
finding of non-responsibility on the basis of Fraud and Corruption in connection
with World Bank Group corporate procurement Further, we are not ineligible under
the laws or official regulations of [Insert name of Employer as per bidding
document] or pursuant to  decision of the United Nations Security Council We
confirm our understanding of the consequences of not complying with the World
Bank’ Anti-Corruption Guidelines, which may include the following:  rejection of
our Proposal/Bid for award of contract;  in the case of award, termination of
the contract, without prejudice to any other remedy for breach of contract; and
2Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects
Financed by International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Loans and the
International Development Agency Credits and Grants, dated October 15, 2006, and
revised in January 2011 and July 2016, as they may be revised from time to time
sanctions, pursuant to the Bank’ Anti-Corruption Guidelines and in accordance
with its prevailing sanctions policies and procedures as set forth in the Bank’
Sanctions Framework This may include  public declaration of ineligibility,
either indefinitely or for  stated period of time, () to be awarded or otherwise
benefit from  Bank-financed contract, financially or in any other manner; (ii)
to be  nominated4 sub-contractor, sub- consultant, consultant, manufacturer or
supplier, or service provider of an otherwise eligible firm being awarded  Bank-
financed contract; and (iii) to receive the proceeds of any loan made by the
Bank or otherwise to participate further in the preparation or implementation of
any Bank-financed project We understand that we may be declared ineligible as
set out above upon:  completion of World Bank Group sanctions proceedings
according to its prevailing sanctions procedures;  cross-debarment as agreed
with other international financial institutions (including multilateral
development banks);  the application of  World Bank Group finding of non-
responsibility on the basis of Fraud and Corruption in connection with World
Bank Group corporate procurement; or  temporary suspension or early temporary
suspension in connection with an ongoing World Bank Group sanctions proceeding
For avoidance of doubt, the foregoing effects of ineligibility do not extend to
sanctioned firm’ or individual’ execution of its ongoing Bank-financed contracts
(or its ongoing sub-agreements under such contracts) that are not the subject of
material modification, as determined by the Bank  For the avoidance of doubt,
sanctioned party’ ineligibility to be awarded  contract shall include, without
limitation, () applying for pre-qualification or initial selection), expressing
interest in  consultancy, and bidding, either directly or as  nominated sub-
contractor, nominated consultant, nominated manufacturer or supplier, or
nominated service provider, in respect of such contract, and (ii) entering into
an addendum or amendment introducing  material modification to any existing
contract 4A nominated sub-contractor, nominated consultant, nominated
manufacturer or supplier, or nominated service provider (different names are
used depending on the bidding document) is one which has been: () included by
the bidder in its pre-qualification or initial selection application or bid
because it brings specific and critical experience and know-how that allow the
bidder to meet the qualification requirements for the particular bid; or (ii)
appointed by the Borrower  We shall permit, and shall cause our sub-contractors,
sub-consultants, agents (whether declared or not), personnel, consultants,
service providers or suppliers, to permit the Bank to inspect5 all accounts,
records, and other documents relating to the procurement process and/or contract
execution (in the case of award), and to have them audited by auditors appointed
by the Bank We agree to preserve all accounts, records, and other documents
(whether in hard copy or electronic format) related to the procurement and
execution of the contract Name of the Bidder/Proposer/Consultant: Name of the
person duly authorized to sign the Bid/Proposal on behalf of the
Bidder/Proposer/ Consultant: Title of the person signing the Letter:
5Inspections in this context are usually investigative (, forensic) in nature:
they involve fact-finding activities undertaken by the Bank or persons appointed
by the Bank to address specific matters related to investigations/audits, such
as evaluating the veracity of an allegation of possible Fraud and Corruption,
through the appropriate mechanisms Such activity includes but is not limited to
accessing and examining  firm' or individual' financial records and information,
and making copies thereof as relevant; accessing and examining any other
documents, data, and information (whether in hard copy or electronic format)
deemed relevant for the investigation/audit, and making copies thereof as
relevant; interviewing staff and other relevant individuals; performing physical
inspections and site visits; and obtaining third-party verification of
information  PROCUREMENT PLAN General Information Country: Bangladesh :
Bangladesh Scaling-up Renewable Energy Project Bank’ Approval Date of the
Original Procurement Plan: -05 -29 Revised Plan Date(): (comma delineated, leave
blank if none) -26 GPN Date: Bangladesh P161869 Bangladesh Scaling-up Renewable
Energy Project TF / A9036 Project ID: Project Name: Loan / Credit No: Executing
Agency(ies):Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority WORKS
Activity Reference No / Description Estimated Amount ( $) Actual Am ount (US$ )
Bid Evaluation Report and Recommendation for Award Loan / Credit   Market
Approac  Procurement Pro cess Prequalification (/) High SEA/SH  isk Procurement
ocument Type Process St atus Draft Pre-qualification Documents Prequalification
Evalu ation Report Draft Bidding Docum ent / Justification Specific Procurement
Notice / Invitation Bidding Documents   Issued Proposal Submission / Opening /
Minutes Contract Complet ion Component Review Type Method Signed Contract
Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual
Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned GOODS Activity Reference No
/ Description Bid Evaluation Report and Recommendation for Award Loan / Credit
Market Approac  Procurement Pro cess Prequalification (/) Estimated Am ount
(US$) Actual Amount (US$) Process St atus Draft Pre-qualification Documents
Prequalification Evalu ation Report Draft Bidding Docum ent / Justification
Specific Procurement Notice / Invitation Bidding Documents   Issued Proposal
Submission / Opening / Minutes Component Review Type Method Signed Contract
Contract Completion Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual
Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual NON
CONSULTING SERVICES Activity Reference No / Description Bid Evaluation Report
and Recommendation for Award Loan / Credit   Market Approac  Procurement Pro
cess Prequalification (/) Estimated Am ount (US$) Actual Amount (US$) Process St
atus Draft Pre-qualification Documents Prequalification Evalu ation Report Draft
Bidding Docum ent / Justification Specific Procurement Notice / Invitation
Bidding Documents   Issued Proposal Submission / Opening / Minutes Component
Review Type Method Signed Contract Contract Completion Planned Actual Planned
Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned
Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual CONSULTING FIRMS Activity Reference No /
Description Combined Evaluation Report and Draft Neg otiated Contract Actual
Loan / Credit   Market Approac  Estimated Amo unt (US$) Actual Amount (US$)
Expression of Interest Notice Short List and Draft  equest for Proposals Request
for Proposals as Issued Opening of Technical Proposals / Minutes Evaluation of
Technic al Proposal Contract Type Component Review Type Method Process Status
Terms of Reference Signed Contract Contract Completion Planned Actual Planned
Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned
Planned Actual Planned Actual S1 / Consultancy Services fo  Environmental &
Social Imp act Assessment & RAP Prepar ation Consultant Qualifi cation Selection
TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Post Open - National 182,00 00 Canceled -01 -01
-14 -25 -19 -19 S2 / Consultancy Services fo  Feasibility Study of Rooftop Solar
on Government Buildin  in Chattogram and Mymens ingh Consultant Qualifi cation
Selection TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Post Open - National 97,00 00 Canceled
-01 -01 -14 -25 -19 -19 S3 / Consultancy Services fo  Bat & Birds Survey for
Wind Energy Consultant Qualifi cation Selection Under Implement ation TF / A9036
Technical Assistance Post Open - National 146,00 00 -01 -19 -01 -14 -28 -24 -17
-17 S7 / Consultancy Services fo  Resource Assessment of Wi nd Energy: Setting
Up Meet Mast/SoDAR, Data Collection, Data Interpretation, Report  eneration, etc
Quality And Cost- Based Selection Open - Internationa  TF / A9036 Technical
Assistance Post 674,00 00 Signed -01 -17 -01 -02 -29 -02 -05 -19 -02 -08 -07 -07
-11 -25 -31 S5 / Consultancy Services fo  Arrangement of Training an  Exposure
Visit on Renewabl  Energy Both Local and Fore ign Quality And Cost- Based
Selection Open - Internationa  TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Post 670,00 00
Canceled -01 -22 -05 -02 -02 -06 -11 -31 S5- / Consultancy Services for Training
Need Assessmen  and Arrangement of Local  raining on Renewable Energy for
Consultant Qualifi cation Selection 00 Signed TF / A9036 Technical Assistance
Post Limited 54,00 -25 -30 -11 -10 -27 -25 -28 -03 -23 S5- / Consultancy
Services for Arrangement of Training and Exposure Visit on Renew able Energy
both Local and  oreign Quality And Cost- Based Selection Open - Internationa
Under Implement ation TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Post 616,00 00 -13 -03 -15
-28 -09 -09 -13 -01 -12 S8 / Consultancy Services fo  Detail Feasibility Study
and Pilot Run of Slaughterhouse Based BIOGAS Plant in Bangl adesh Quality And
Cost- Based Selection Under Implement ation TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Post
Open - National 365,00 00 -28 -28 -22 -27 -30 -31 -28 -25 -30 -22 S4 /
Consultancy Services fo  Document Preparation for  agura Solar Park Quality And
Cost- Based Selection Open - Internationa  00 Canceled TF / A9036 Technical
Assistance Post 529,00 -16 -15 -14 -26 -25 -30 -03 -03 S4- / Study on grid plan
for wind power projects Quality And Cost- Based Selection Pending Impleme
ntation 00 TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Post Open - National 140,00 -01 -22
-05 -02 -02 -06 -10 -09 INDIVIDUAL CONSULTANTS Activity Reference No /
Description Loan / Credit   Market Approac  Estimated Amo unt (US$) Actual
Amount (US$) Invitation to Identifie /Selected Consultant Draft Negotiated Cont
ract Contract Type Component Review Type Method Process Status Terms of
Reference Signed Contract Contract Completion Planned Actual Planned Actual
Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual S10 / Social and Environmen tal
Consultant Individual Consult ant Selection TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Post
Limited 50,00 44,37 Signed -29 -28 -06 -01 -20 -20 -30 -21 -29 S6 / Individual
Local Procure ment Consultant Individual Consult ant Selection 71,43 Signed TF /
A9036 Technical Assistance Post Limited 100,00 -07 -28 -10 -01 -31 -01 -05 -25
-04 S9 / Financial Management  pecialist Individual Consult ant Selection 32,71
Signed TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Post Limited 52,22 -29 -28 -07 -01 -21
-09 -01 -01 -30 BD-SREDA-373533-CS-INDV / For Financial Management Specialist
Recruitment Individual Consult ant Selection Pending Impleme ntation TF / A9036
Technical Assistance Post Limited 44,00 -23 -28 -27 -10 -30 00 Page  BD-
SREDA-373539-CS-INDV / For Procurement Specialist Recruitment Individual Consult
ant Selection Pending Impleme ntation TF / A9036 Technical Assistance Prior
Limited 62,00 00 -23 -28 -27 -10 -30 Page