NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY (Updated in 2005) GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’ REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH MINISTRY OF POWER, ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES DHAKA, NOVEMBER 2005
Contents SL NO NAME OF POLICY SELECTION PAGE STRATEGY PLANNING & MANAGEMENT
INTEGRATION OF ENERGY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  II SMALL AND CAPTIVE POLICY  III
PRIVATE SECTOR POWER GENERATION POLICY  IV RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY    VI  VII
VIII  IX XI XII  INTRODUCTION  Background Improving access to energy in
Bangladesh is  fundamental contribution to poverty reduction and key to
attaining the United Nations Millennium Development Goals As energy is
prerequisite for social and economic development it is essential to move towards
sustainability in energy systems both in order to protect natural life-support
systems on which humanity depends, and to eradicate poverty With rapid change of
global as well as domestic situation it has become necessary to update National
Energy Policy (NEP) of Bangladesh, which was formulated in 1996 to proper
exploration, production, transmission, distribution and rational use of energy
sources to meet the growing demand on  sustainable basis It involves survey,
exploration, exploitation and distribution of indigenous natural gas;
development of coal in the northern part of the country: establishment of
petroleum refining facility and distribution systems; and establishment of power
generation plants and networks for transmission and distribution of electricity
It is also necessary to take proper steps to enhance renewable energy
development activity to meet the future challenge Energy demand in Bangladesh is
rising swiftly Demand is outstripping the production and transmission &
distribution capability Especially power demand exceeds generation capacity
There are also some bottlenecks in power transmission and distribution system
All these leads to increased load shed and poor quality of power supply Out of
140 million people about 50 million have direct access to electricity Per capita
electricity generation in 2005 was only 158 kWh In  about 24 million households
had piped natural gas connections and only 32% of total households used kerosene
as cooking Per capita consumption of commercial energy and electricity in
Bangladesh is one of the lowest even among the developing countries At present
about 65% of total final energy consumption is met by different type of
traditional biomass fuels ( agricultural residues, wood fuels, animal dung etc)
Shortcomings of the past energy development programmes and management practices
are identified as follows () It has not been possible to undertake systematic
survey, exploration and exploitation of energy resources throughout the country
due to financial constraints As  result, it has not been possible to ensure
balanced development of energy resources of different zones of the country and
balanced development of different sub-sectors of the energy sector It has not
been possible to undertake systematic development of Power Generation,
Transmission and Distribution projects and rational use of electricity in the
country () () Expansion of energy consuming sectors  industrial sector have to
shortage and unreliable supply of been constrained due commercial energy ()
Energy agencies have not been operated and managed efficiently () Energy prices
have not been set on  rational basis () Effective measures have not been taken
to ensure proper use of energy through integration of economic development
activities () Unplanned and inefficient use of fuels is contributing to
environmental degradation () Adequate attention has not been given to meet the
total energy needs of rural areas () Adequate attention has not been given to
undertake systematic technological to develop indigenous research programmes
capabilities () Adequate attention has not been given to develop trained
manpower for the efficient management of the sector Government made vision and
policy statement in 2000 for power sector development Government’ vision is to
provide reliable and affordable power to all by To materialize the vision Gas,
prime fuel for power generation provides  special window of opportunity Again to
increase the security and reliability of power supply, diversified use of fuel
shall get importance Considering all there should be homogeneous development of
all segments of energy sources and sector to achieve the desired goal It is
essential to take measures on both the supply and demand side in order to
improve access to advanced low-emission energy forms and to renewable energy
sources, and to improve the energy efficiency these To ensure sustainable
development of energy sector, updated National Energy Policy will address
various issues to overcome shortcomings mentioned above  Objectives The
objectives of the revised National Energy Policy (NEP) are outlined as follows
() To provide energy for sustainable economic growth so that the economic
development activities of different sectors are not constrained due to shortage
of energy (ii) To ensure optimum development of all the indigenous energy
sources (iii) To meet the energy needs of different zones of the country and
socio- economic groups (iv) To ensure sustainable operation of the energy
utilities () To ensure rational use of total energy sources (vi) To ensure
environmentally sound sustainable energy development programmes, with due
importance to renewable energy, causing minimum damage to environment (vii) To
encourage public and private sector participation in the development and
management of the energy sector (viii) To integrate energy with rural
development to boost rural economy (ix) To bring entire country under
electrification by the year () To ensure reliable supply of energy to the people
at reasonable and affordable price (xi) To develop  regional energy market for
rational exchange of commercial energy to ensure energy security Policy and
Guidelines  Policy and Guidelines listed bellow on Power and Energy are
presented in the following sections of this document () (ii) Strategic Planning
and Management Integration of Energy and Rural Development (iii) Small and
Captive Power Policy (iv) Private Sector Power Generation Policy () Renewable
Energy Policy (vi) ****** (vii) ****** (viii) ****** (ix) ****** () ******