Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/BGD/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Bangladesh has made significant
progress in human development, poverty reduction and economic growth, which
makes it eligible to graduate from least developed country (LDC) status by Food
production tripled between 1973 and 2019 and from 2009 to 2019, annual gross
domestic product (GDP) growth averaged  per cent and per capita income rose from
$754 to $,This in turn has resulted in the reduction of poverty from 35 to 20
per cent in the same period Gains in educational attainment, lower fertility
rates, agricultural growth, disaster resilience and remittance inflows all
contributed to this reduction As the service and industry sectors account for
the bulk of GDP, investments in training and upskilling in sectors such as
agriculture and manufacturing will help deliver better human development
outcomes  Despite  positive macroeconomic outlook, Bangladesh continues to face
unprecedented development challenges due to its vulnerability to shocks, some of
which are transboundary in nature The magnitude of people affected by climate-
induced disasters remains  concern with an estimate that one of every seven
Bangladeshis will experience displacement by Bangladesh faces considerable
policy challenges which need to be addressed to achieve sustainable growth The
overdependence on ready-made garment exports and remittance inflows has
amplified external vulnerabilities in the economy Job creation and poverty
reduction rates have slowed since 2010, hurting youth and women most Rapid and
largely unplanned urbanization has severely undermined liveability
Simultaneously, inequalities have widened and progress remains geographically
uneven As of 2019, per cent of the population were multidimensionally poor and
another per cent were vulnerable to multidimensional poverty Religious and
ethnic minorities and various vulnerable communities, such as the urban poor and
those in remote areas, are disproportionately disadvantaged Pre-existing
inequalities have been further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, resulting in millions of people being pushed below the poverty line
The impact also includes  decline in exports, lower private investment and
subsequent job losses  continued focus on digital transformation throughout the
economy and governance structure, making Internet and mobile devices affordable
and accessible, is critical and will have  strong impact on reducing poverty and
inequality  While there have been improvements in outcomes such as maternal
mortality and educational enrolment rates, challenges around women’ empowerment
persist due to discriminatory social norms and practices and violence against
women Although Bangladesh is the best performer in South Asia in closing the
gender gap, child marriage rates are high These vulnerabilities have been
amplified by COVID-19, where loss of livelihoods, increase in unpaid care work,
child marriage and domestic violence have disproportionately affected women
UNDP is widely recognized as  trusted development partner It has an established
convening role and works with public, private and civil society stakeholders to
facilitate more inclusive solutions as the integrator across the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development UNDP works at both national and local levels on
evidence-based policymaking and strengthening capacity for planning,
implementation and monitoring  During the preceding programme cycle, UNDP work
was aligned to the Government’ agenda as evidenced by the 2019 independent
country programme evaluation UNDP has helped to address complex development
challenges by focusing on the needs of the poorest and the most vulnerable,
including the urban poor and those in lagging regions such as Chattogram Hill
Tracts The UNDP comparative advantage lies in its proven track record of ably
supporting climate change adaptation and mitigation, environmental and disaster
risk management, access to justice, -service delivery, accelerating digitization
and social protection It has contributed to improvements in civic engagement,
more effective local governments, revenue collection, budget execution and
allocation of resources to advance gender equality Initial climate change
mitigation interventions  Human Development Report 2020: Briefing note for
Bangladesh  notes/BGDpdf   /13  DP/DCP/BGD/ were successful in laying the
foundations for future emission reductions UNDP has played  useful role in the
response to the Rohingya3 crisis, focusing on the longer-term development
implications of the crisis and its impact on host communities  At the same time,
shortfalls and challenges of the country programme  provide lessons for the
proposed programme While UNDP support to local governance has brought
incremental improvements, inadequate decentralization has limited the impact
Additionally, advocacy for green growth and climate change mitigation has had
limited result; transformation at the grass-roots level did not translate into
commensurate progress at the policy level; and implementation of the Chattogram
Hill Tracts Peace Accord remains incomplete, making this region vulnerable to
demographic, religious and regional cross-currents, including the recent influx
of Rohingyas However, the Government of Bangladesh remains committed to ensure
the full implementation of the Peace Accord UNDP also faced challenges in
mobilizing resources for democratic governance and justice sector reform There
was uneven policy-level progress on achieving gender parity and the increasing
number of development challenges require transboundary solutions Unanticipated
developments such as the Rohingya influx, COVID-19 pandemic and accelerated LDC
graduation underscored the need for agility and adaptability to remain relevant
The pandemic also revealed that: () investments by Digital Bangladesh have
helped business continuity, but there is now an urgent need to narrow the
digital divide; and () more focus on mitigating disruption of supply chains is
required as part of disaster risk reduction While increasing government co-
financing is key to locking in project gains and ensuring sustainability, there
is clearly untapped potential of the private sector for achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals Delayed project approvals have constrained timely
project delivery and resource mobilization Addressing these challenges is
prerequisite for  successful delivery of the proposed country programme  During
the consultations on the new country programme, UNDP, together with stakeholders
including the Government, development partners, civil society, the private
sector and other United Nations agencies, identified  series of strategies that
will entail  new way of working This country programme is firmly anchored in the
development aspirations and priorities enshrined in the 8th Five Year Plan, is
an integral part of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework (UNSDCF),  and is aligned to the UNDP Strategic Plan  Considering that
the overall focus of national development during this programme period will be
on LDC graduation, it will also be the principal priority for the UNDP country
programme The overall theory of change is that if sustainable economic growth is
accelerated with increased equitable opportunities for decent income
opportunities, if institutions, ecosystems and people are more resilient to
disasters and climate change, and if  more accountable and inclusive governance
system is in place, then people in Bangladesh – especially the most vulnerable –
benefit from inclusive and equitable socioeconomic opportunities and services,
increased transparency and civic participation in public affairs and
sustainable graduation from LDC status  This theory of change will require the
country programme both to build on existing work and to adopt new and innovative
development solutions, including: () Addressing spatial poverty traps through
localization of the Sustainable Development Goals in lagging regions and
environmentally critical areas This will also help to inform future
decentralization efforts; () Building alliances for advocacy for green growth
and climate change mitigation, nature-based solutions and universal coverage of
the social safety net; () Identifying transboundary solutions for common
development challenges; () Intensifying strategic engagement with the private
sector for achieving the Goals; () Advancing the culture of innovation for new-
generation governance, citizen-centric public service delivery and digital
solutions to ensure last-mile connectivity; () Supporting Bangladesh in its
global positioning and branding  This country programme does not include
programming related to the Rohingya crisis The Government of Bangladesh refers
to the Rohingya as “Forcibly Displaced Myanmar Nationals” The United Nations
system refers to this population as Rohingya refugees, in line with the
international framework /13  DP/DCP/BGD/ Gender equality and women’ empowerment
is  cross-cutting priority Overall, this country programme will have an elevated
investment in social transformation for gender equality and empowerment of
women, youth and other vulnerable groups, and in increasing awareness and
engagement on civil rights and responsibilities UNDP will promote leadership and
participation of women in decision-making, in promoting sustainable development
and sustaining social cohesion It will advocate for increased employment and
economic opportunities for women so that they can act as change agents to
further reduce the gender gap UNDP will mobilize its global knowledge and
expertise to remove structural barriers; raise awareness of and prevent harmful
social norms and practices such as gender-based violence; and build
institutional and individual capacities for equal participation in social,
economic and political activities To this end, UNDP will play three specific
interconnected roles: () Designing future-proof policies to ensure the relevance
of the Government’ planning; () Policy advocacy through cutting-edge research to
ensure that risks and opportunities are debated and integrated into policy
planning; () Acting as  facilitator to bring together traditional and non-
traditional stakeholders UNDP is well positioned to facilitate  stronger
engagement between the United Nations and the private sector and to leverage the
wealth of human capital in the country One of the priorities is to deploy
innovative development financing options through public-private partnerships II
Programme priorities and partnerships This country programme envisions that the
people of Bangladesh – especially the most vulnerable – contribute to and
benefit equitably from the integrated social, environmental and economic
dimensions of sustainable and inclusive development To that end, this country
programme will support three strategic priorities of the UNSDCF: () inclusive
and sustainable economic development; ()  sustainable, healthy and resilient
environment; and () transformative, participatory and inclusive governance
Outcome  (also UNSCDF Outcome ), pathway to inclusive and sustainable economic
development, envisions that by 2026, more people in Bangladesh, particularly the
most vulnerable and marginalized from all gender and social groups and those
from lagging districts, benefit from sustainable livelihood and decent work
opportunities resulting from responsible, inclusive, sustainable, green and
equitable economic development It will focus on achieving the following key
results: () The Government is supported to design and implement conducive
policies, regulatory frameworks and  governance mechanism for Sustainable
Development Goal financing to attract investment from diversified sources in
labour-intensive, responsible and green economic sectors; () Women and youth,
especially those who own cottage, small and medium-sized enterprises, benefit
from market-driven skills development, from access to financial and non-
financial services to adopt appropriate technologies, and from innovative
business models driving improved productivity, competitiveness, resilience and
sustainability of enterprises and jobs; () Policy and regulatory frameworks
enabling greater access to and utilization of inclusive, gender-responsive and
resilient basic social and protection services are strengthened Efforts will be
directed towards  sustainable LDC graduation through: () catalysing and
institutionalizing innovative financing solutions, especially support for an
integrated national financing framework and public-private partnerships; ()
supporting the transition to climate- smart, green and digital technologies
through policy, legal and fiscal reforms; () strengthening the resilience of and
access to the entire business supply chain and market system with  focus on
cottage, small and medium-sized enterprises; () boosting entrepreneurship with
focus on women; () the development of  future-proof labour market with  focus on
responsive skill enhancement; () accelerating social protection system reforms
for  nationally appropriate universal approach; () supporting the business
sector to be human rights-compliant; and () promoting risk protection through
insurance and risk finance for government, individuals and /13  DP/DCP/BGD/
enterprises Business associations will be assisted to develop responsible
business conduct guidelines; promote awareness among the member businesses; and
implement integrated digital solutions to achieve more productive,
commercialized and climate-resilient businesses Integrated support to the
informal economy will be provided through  series of interventions and existing
platforms such as measures to safeguard the urban poor and new poor, social
protection/cash transfer and strengthening supply chains in rural and in urban
settings Outcome , pathway to  sustainable, healthy and resilient environment
(UNSDCF outcome ), envisions that by 2026, ecosystems are healthier, and all
people, in particular the most vulnerable and marginalized in both rural and
urban settings, benefit from and contribute to, in  gender-responsive manner,
cleaner environment, an enriched natural resource base and low- carbon
development, and are more resilient to climate change, shocks and disasters It
will focus on achieving the following key results: () More people, especially
the most vulnerable and marginalized, have increased capacities, knowledge and
skills to adopt sustainable consumption behaviours and lead in climate action;
Institutions have strengthened capacities to develop and deliver policies,
strategies and legal instruments to improve and restore ecosystem health and
manage risks, such as climate change, disaster, pandemics and humanitarian
crises; Government, the private sector and civil society demonstrate enhanced
commitment and capacities to provide efficient oversight for environmental
policies and legal frameworks, identifying financing solutions and prioritizing
green investments () () UNDP will continue assisting the Government to
mainstream environmental conservation and sustainability into national and
regional development processes with due consideration to obligations under
multilateral environment agreements UNDP interventions will focus on
identifying, piloting and scaling up data-driven and tech- based smart policies
and solutions that are environmentally friendly, circular and risk-informed UNDP
will work on: () improving the institutional and regulatory frameworks governing
the environmental sector; () providing technical and financial support,
including through small grants instruments, for promotion of community
engagement in co-management and monitoring of natural resources to increase
local ownership, improve livelihoods and reduce poverty; and () mainstreaming
ecosystem-based approaches and nature-based solutions into policymaking,
community development and landscape restoration UNDP will advocate for an
inclusive and participatory institutional ecosystem that will enable women and
youth to act as change agents This will require an all-of-society engagement,
including volunteers and local community groups for environmental awareness,
including consumption behaviour changes UNDP will address sustainable energy for
all and insecurity by unlocking retrofit markets for energy-efficient, renewable
and cleaner sources and facilitate access to international climate financing
mechanisms for mitigation and adaptation UNDP will ensure intersectoral
coordination across its nature, climate, disaster and environment portfolio In
the COVID-19 context, UNDP will pay significant attention to minimizing the
negative fallouts of the Anthropocene UNDP will support science- and data-based
investment and policymaking capacities to address the environment-health nexus
green and resilient recovery will be boosted by promoting sustainable
settlements through low-emission and circular-economy models, and integrating
climate adaptation and mitigation into sectoral strategies and action plans in
line with the Sendai Framework and the Paris Climate Agreement UNDP will provide
policy and technical support for biodiversity management, resilient livelihoods
and strengthen national capacity for disaster risk management Outcome , pathway
to transformative, participatory and inclusive governance, envisions that by
2026, more people, especially the most vulnerable, benefit from more equitable,
non- discriminatory, gender-responsive, participatory and accountable governance
and justice, in  peaceful and tolerant society governed by the rule of law It
will focus on achieving the following results: /13  DP/DCP/BGD/ () The
Government and other duty bearers, along with all rights holders, are better
able to uphold standards, practices and norms that promote social cohesion,
human rights, non- discrimination and empowerment of women and other vulnerable
groups; Public institutions and other quasi-formal institutions and normative
and policy frameworks have enhanced capacities and frameworks to ensure
accountable and gender-responsive governance according to the rule of law; Civil
society organizations (CSOs), especially district CSO networks, oversight bodies
and the private sector, are better able to participate meaningfully in decision-
making and to promote, protect and respect human rights and to fight against
discrimination () () UNDP will continue supporting the Government, Parliament,
judiciary and oversight institutions towards improved accountability and
transparency at multiple levels, focusing on quality service delivery Key lines
of action include improving the availability of quality data on the Sustainable
Development Goals and enhancing national management of disaggregated data,
including the statistical capacity for monitoring progress towards the Goals;
and strengthening local government capacities in planning and public finance
management, along with advocacy and capacity-building for mainstreaming social
audits and implementation of the national integrity strategy UNDP will continue
strengthening the institutional capacity of the National Human Rights Commission
to fulfil its mandate Intensified efforts will be made to strengthen the
reporting capacity of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to follow up on the
Universal Periodic Review and monitor its implementation As peace consolidation
remains fragile in the Chattogram Hill Tracts, UNDP will continue its support
for democratization and strengthening of decentralized governance institutions
In the area of access to justice, UNDP will strengthen capacities for judicial
case management and ease of access to judicial services through digitalization
and legal aid UNDP will continue to support village courts for alternate dispute
resolution and other redressal mechanisms, particularly for disadvantaged groups
Continued strengthening of the capacities of the police, in particular the
Bangladesh Women’ Police Network and Prisons Directorate, will help ensure
gender-responsive justice in line with United Nations standards Considering the
strategic importance of the Economic Relations Division (ERD) as  custodian of
improving development effectiveness, UNDP will continue to provide technical
support to strengthen evidence-based policymaking through the national knowledge
repository (“ERDPEDIA”) and mobilize external resources with increased focus on
broadening and deepening the contributions of non-resident Bangladeshis to the
economy and society UNDP will continue supporting strategic dialogue platforms
aimed at broadening the civic and political space for youth and marginalized
groups and providing information on human rights, legal aid and public services
Capitalizing on the country’ short window of demographic dividend, UNDP will
work with youth to help them achieve their potential and contribute to
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will provide skills
training; promote digital literacy to improve decent income opportunities for
youth, the spread of misinformation and hate speech; and advance social cohesion
through promotion of cultural activities UNDP will also promote ecotourism that
will help environmental conservation while also creating sustainable livelihood
opportunities UNDP will apply  cross-portfolio approach to programming and
ensure  dynamic linkage and interaction between the three outcomes both
programmatically and operationally Internal mechanisms are already in place to
facilitate cross-fertilization, implementation, joint monitoring, information
sharing, and joint learning This will help address programme fragmentation and
enhance synergy and promote both the “One UNDP” and the “One UN” spirit UNDP
will strive to strengthen partnerships with bilateral and multilateral donors,
international financial institutions, international organizations and other
emerging partners UNDP will continue its leading role in its areas of
comparative advantage, , scaling up key development accelerators related to
regional and urban development, localizing the Sustainable Development Goals in
lagging districts including Cox’ Bazar, Kurigram and Satkhira with emphasis on
coordinated programming nexus, climate actions and social protection The other
key priorities are advancing partnerships with the private sector, civil
society, philanthropic /13  DP/DCP/BGD/ foundations and associations of non-
resident Bangladeshis to design innovative solutions that are catalysed on
blended development financing The Adaptation Fund, Global Environmental
Facility, Green Climate Fund and other multilateral funds will remain critical
partners, with  vision to scale up existing programming areas and introduce new
ones in line with government priorities In line with the United Nations reform
agenda, UNDP will expand its portfolio of inter-agency partnerships, especially
around issue-based coalitions with relevant agencies on transboundary issues,
youth employment, women’ economic empowerment, urbanization, financial
inclusion, anti-corruption, the impact of climate change on women and
environmental sustainability, and data and Sustainable Development Goal
monitoring, with  focus on supporting cohesive and integrated United Nations
action and leveraging volunteerism in programme implementation Through its well-
established platforms and networks, , a2i (“Aspire to Innovate”), specializing
in introducing innovation to simplify public service delivery, UNDP will
continue championing South-South and triangular cooperation; and facilitate
sharing of knowledge and experience on topics such as climate change, disaster
risk reduction, digitization, innovation and private sector development III
Programme and risk management This country programme document serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country
programmes are prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies
and procedures and internal control framework The programme will be nationally
executed If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution
for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure The
harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with
other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks Cost definitions and
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the concerned projects This country programme faces the following risks: () the
collateral impacts of COVID-19 have yet to fully unfold and be understood,
making the operating context even more volatile, uncertain, complex and
ambiguous; ()  protracted COVID-19 pandemic can make LDC graduation
unsustainable for Bangladesh and undermine the ability of UNDP to deliver
planned results; () shortfalls in official development assistance, as
consequence of both LDC graduation and the possibility of economic recession in
donor countries caused by the pandemic; and () catastrophic events could cause
massive loss of lives and assets and compromise long-term development objectives
UNDP will strengthen its risk management procedures for risk identification,
mitigation and diversification This will include applying  portfolio approach to
programming, focusing on fostering  linkage between humanitarian response,
development and peace Systems thinking will underpin this work, ensuring
holistic approaches to complex problems including predicting and responding to
future emerging trends and unforeseen requests for support from the Government
The LDC graduation will have several implications for funding, including
reduction in the regular resources allocation for the country programme UNDP
will adopt  diversification approach to resource mobilization through renewed
partnerships at country and regional levels, increased private sector
engagement, fostering new partnerships and increased government financing as
catalyst to attract more resources from development partners UNDP will ensure
that its business processes are efficient and cost-effective Disasters may
reduce the ability of communities and stakeholders to stay engaged in
development initiatives Mitigating actions will include disaster preparedness
and  business continuity plan which UNDP will update to strengthen programme
resilience for uninterrupted delivery Risk management will include the
systematic and portfolio-wide use of these registers and reprogramming if
required /13  DP/DCP/BGD/ Frequent monitoring of the political economy and
operating context will inform modifications in the theory of change and planned
programmes UNDP will use risk monitoring as  tool for early warning, risk
management, risk mitigation and decision-making in line with the UNDP social and
environmental standards and accountability mechanisms IV Monitoring and
evaluation The programme will be aligned to corporate monitoring and evaluation
requirements including United Nations Evaluation Group norms and standards and
dedicated budget allocation to improve internal capacities in monitoring and
evaluation UNDP will capitalize on initiatives such as the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency programme on environment and climate change to
strengthen country office capacities for integrated programming, social and
environmental standards, gender mainstreaming, data and knowledge management
including linking research work to advocacy, and collaboration with the United
Nations country team and other partners UNDP will adopt innovative approaches to
monitoring and evaluation , third-party monitoring, to help ensure transparency
in documenting achievements, progress and lessons learned Improved quality of
project monitoring through collection of aggregated data will help measure the
success of the programme and contribute to learning of lessons and decision-
making Results-oriented monitoring will enhance accountability, and robust
evaluations with strengthened gender aspects will generate evidence for results
achieved UNDP will apply  cross-portfolio approach for three evaluations to
inform course correction responding to evolving national contexts; identify
opportunities for synergies across the country programme; scale up solutions;
enhance portfolio development; and promote joint learning and innovation, both
internally and with partners UNDP will partner with United Nations organizations
and data-generating entities (, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics) to strengthen
national capacities for monitoring progress towards the Sustainable Development
Goals through nationally owned sources of data, and to enhance data quality and
availability Reliable disaggregated data are essential to ensuring universal
access to development outcomes /13  DP/DCP/BGD/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Bangladesh () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDGs , ,  and 10 National
Priority: Inclusive Economic Growth through Macroeconomic Stability (SDG ),
Reducing Poverty and Inequality (SDGs  & 10), Employment (SDG ), and Gender (SDG
) and Inequality (SDG 10) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By
2026, more people in Bangladesh, particularly the most vulnerable and
marginalized from all gender and social groups and those from lagging districts,
benefit from sustainable livelihoods and decent work opportunities resulting
from responsible, inclusive, sustainable, green and equitable economic
development RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Advance poverty
eradication in all its forms and dimensions COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME
INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION,
AND RESPONSIBILITIES MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY
OUTCOME ($) INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators,
baselines targets) Indicator: Annual growth rate of real GDP per employed person
Baseline: 85% () Target: % (2026) Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS)
Frequency: Annual Responsible Institutions: BBS Output : The Government is
supported to design and implement conducive policies, regulatory framework and
SDG financing governance mechanism to attract investment from diversified
sources in labour-intensive, responsible and green economic sectors Regular
,170,000 • Cabinet Division • Finance Division • Bangladesh Bank • General
Economics Other 56,670,000 Division Indicative Indicator  Amount leveraged and
materialized for financing prioritized SDG and/or climate action from public
budget gradually increased Baseline: TBD, Target: 20% increase (2026); Source:
Project review reports, Frequency: Annual • Local Government Source: BBS
Frequency: Triennial Responsible Institutions: BBS, General Economics Division
Division Indicator: Growth rates of () household expenditure or () income per
capita among the bottom 40 percent of the population and the total population
Baseline: () ); ()  (2016) Target: () ; ()  (2026) • Ministry of Social Welfare
• Ministry of Output : Women and youth, especially those who own cottage, small
and medium-sized enterprises, benefit from market-driven skills development,
access to financial and non-financial services to adopt appropriate
technologies, innovative business models driving to improved productivity,
competitiveness, resilience and sustainability of enterprises and jobs
Chittagong Hill Tracts Affairs Source: BBS Frequency: Annual Responsible
Institutions: Cabinet Division, General Economics Division, BBS • Ministry of
Labour and Employment • Public-Private Partnership Authorities • National Skills
Development Agency Indicative Indicator  Number of people accessing financial
services as  direct result of UNDP interventions Baseline (2020): women:
,462,492, men: ,650,000, Target (2026): women:  million; men: 12 million;
Source: Project survey reports, Frequency: Annual Indicator: Proportion of
population covered by social protection Baseline: % (2016) Target: % (2026)
Source: BBS Frequency: Triennial Responsible Institutions: Cabinet Division,
General Economics Division, BBS Indicative Indicator  Number of new full-time
equivalent jobs created, and livelihoods strengthened for youth 15+ years old as
direct result of UNDP interventions Baseline (2020): women: 41,160, men: ,165,
Target (2026): women: 81,356, men: ,600; Source: Project survey reports,
Frequency: Annual • United Kingdom Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
/13  DP/DCP/BGD/ Indicative Indicator  Number of districts that develop the
mechanism for effective funding allocations to facilitate women’ economic
empowerment Baseline (2020): , Target (2026): ; Source: Official documentation
of local government institutions / Project review reports, Frequency: Annual •
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency Indicator: Proportion of
population living below the national poverty line Baseline: Upper poverty line
(UPL): %; Lower poverty line (LPL): % (2019) Target: UPL: %, LPL: % (2026) •
Government of Output : Policy and regulatory frameworks enabling greater access
to and utilization of inclusive, gender-responsive and resilient basic social
and protection services are strengthened Canada • Danish International
Development Agency Indicative Indicator  Number of people accessing basic
services as  direct result of UNDP interventions Baseline (2020): poor:
,620,983; women: ,420,492; persons with  disability (PWDs): 812,460; Youth:
,867,376 Target (2026): poor: ,662,398; women: ,381,199; PWDs: ,173,368; Youth:
,129,608; Source: Project impact assessment reports/project survey reports,
Frequency: Annual • Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation • ILO • UNCDF • UNICEF • UN-
Women Indicative Indicator  Number of underserved citizens receiving digital
Government to People (G2P) payments Baseline (2020): 72 million, Men: 75
million, Women: 97 million, Target (2026): 75 million, Men: 11 million, women:
64 million; Source: Annual Project Review Reports/Project Dashboard, Frequency:
Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDGs , ,  National Priority: Power, Energy and
Mineral Resources (SDG ), Transport and Communication (SDG ), Urban Development
(SDG 11), and Environment, Climate Change and Disaster Management (SDGs )
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2026, ecosystems are
healthier, and all people, in particular the most vulnerable and marginalized in
both rural and urban settings, benefit from and contribute to, in  gender
responsive manner,  cleaner environment, an enriched natural resource base, low-
carbon development, and are more resilient to climate change, shocks and
disasters RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Strengthen resilience to
shocks and crises Indicator: () Number of deaths and () directly affected
persons attributed to disasters per 100,000 population Baseline: () Deaths: 2045
(2016), () Affected persons: Data Source: DDM Output : More people in
Bangladesh, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, have increased
capacities, knowledge, and skills to adopt sustainable consumption behaviours
and lead in climate action Regular 11,260,000 • Local Government Division •
Department of Frequency: Annual Environment (DoE) Other 119,040,000 Indicative
Indicator  Number of people adopted diversified, climate- resilient livelihood
options Baseline (2020): women: TBD; men: TBD, Target (2026): women: 56,159;
men: 55,711; Source: Project assessment reports, Responsible Institutions: DDM,
MODMR,  Gender-disaggregated targets will be set 10  DP/DCP/BGD/ 12,881 (2015)
Target: Deaths: TBD (2026), Affected Persons: ,000 MOCHTA, MOEFCC Frequency:
Annual • Department of Disaster Management (DDM) Indicative Indicator  Number of
people with year-round access to reliable and safe drinking water Baseline
(2020): women: 34,527; men: 34,758 Target (2026): women: 104,026; men:106,459;
Source: Water option database, Water quality monitoring report, Operations and
Maintenance survey results Frequency: Annual Data Source: DoE, DPHE • Bangladesh
Forest Department • Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief (MoDMR) •
Ministry of Fisheries Frequency: Annual Indicative Indicator  Number of
disaster-resilient houses that are community assets Baseline (2020): 70,000;
Target (2026): 380,000, Source: Documents of Department of Disaster Management
(DDM) Indicator: CO2 emissions (tonnes per capita) Baseline: 91 (2011) Target:
38 (2026) Responsible Institutions: DoE, DPHE and Livestock • Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MOEFCC) Indicative Indicator  Number of
people with secured jobs and improved livelihoods in crisis or post-crisis
settings Baseline (2020): women: 36,335; men: 39,300, Target (2026): women:
75,000; men: 80,000, Source: Annual project reports, Frequency: Annual •
Directorate General of Health Services • Department of Public Health Engineering
(DPHE) Output : Institutions have strengthened capacities to develop, manage and
deliver policies, strategies, and actions to improve ecosystem health and manage
dynamic risks, such as climate change, disasters, pandemics, and humanitarian
crises • Planning Commission • District councils • Ministry of Health Indicative
Indicator  Number of vulnerable households (women, poor and marginalized people)
who benefit from climate change adaptation finance Baseline (2020): ,717, Target
(2026): 15,000, Source: Annual progress review reports/ Upazila Parishad
performance assessment report, Frequency: Annual and Family Welfare • Ministry
of Chittagong Hill Tracts Affairs (MOCHTA) Indicative Indicator  Number of
cities with subnational mechanisms being implemented for mitigating risks to
urban centres Baseline (2020): 17 cities, Target (2026): 20 cities, Source:
Project impact assessment, Frequency: Annual • GCF • GEF • United States Agency
for International Development Output : Government actors, the private sector and
civil society demonstrate enhanced commitment and capacities to provide
efficient oversight functions for environmental policies and legal frameworks,
identifying financing solutions, and prioritizing green investments • Sida •
European Union • FCDO • Unilever • FAO • UNCDF Indicative Indicator  Degree of
integration of climate finance for both adaptation and mitigation in medium-term
budget framework (MTBF) and medium-term macroeconomic policy statement (MTMPS)
Baseline (2020): 11  DP/DCP/BGD/ Moderately integrated, Target (2026): Fully
integrated5, Data source: MTBF and MTMPS, Frequency: Annual Indicative Indicator
Consumption of ozone-depleting -CFCs [Ozone- depleting potential] Baseline
(2020): 35, Target (2026): 61, Source: DoE document, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator  Percentage of plastic waste managed by municipal
governments Baseline (2020): 20%, Target (2026): 40%, Source: Project progress
report/city corporation documents, Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
SDGs , 10, 16 National Priority: Governance (SDG 16), gender (SDG ) and
inequality (SDG-10) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: by 2026,
more people, especially the most vulnerable, benefit from more equitable, non-
discriminatory, gender- responsive, participatory, accountable governance and
justice, in  peaceful and tolerant society governed by the rule of law RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Accelerate structural transformations for
sustainable development Indicator: Proportion of population satisfied with their
last experience of public services Baseline: 69% (2018) Target: 60% (2026) Data
Source: BBS Output : The Government and other duty bearers, along with all
rights holders, are better able to uphold standards, practices and norms that
promote social cohesion, human rights, non-discrimination and empowerment of
women and other vulnerable groups Regular ,080,000 • Cabinet Division • Law and
Justice Division Frequency: Triennial • Local Government Other 95,000,000
Division • Ministry of Responsible Institutions: Cabinet Division Ministry of
Public Affairs Indicative Indicator  Number of people who have access to
informal justice Baseline (2020): women: 88,849, men: 216,126, Target (2026):
women: 200,000, men: 450,000; Source: Project management information system
(MIS), Frequency: Annual Chittagong Hill Tracts Affairs • Ministry of Law,
Indicator: Number of queries attended to by government institutions under right
to information act Baseline: 12,852 (2019) Target: 12,500 (2026) Dara Source:
Information Commission Justice and Parliamentary Affairs Indicative Indicator
Percentage of citizens (disaggregated by women/men, poor, marginalized groups)
who are satisfied with the services of Upazila Parishads Baseline (2020): women:
%, men: %, poor: %, marginalized groups: %, Target (2026): women: 70%, men: 75%,
poor: 78%, marginalized groups: 55%; Source: Project evaluation reports,
Frequency: Annual • Ministry of Public Frequency: Annual Responsible
Institutions: Information Commission Affairs • Ministry of Home Affairs •
Information Commission Indicative Indicator  Number of victim cases of sexual
and gender-based violence redressed through institutional responses from NHRC
and NLASO Baseline (2020): , Target (2026): 50, Source: Documents/Reports of
NHRC  Moderately integrated: Chapter  of MTMPS reflects climate dimension; Fully
integrated: All chapters of MTMPS reflect climate dimension 12  DP/DCP/BGD/ and
NLASO, Frequency: Annual • National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) Output :
Public institutions and other quasi-formal institutions and normative and policy
frameworks have enhanced capacities and frameworks to ensure accountable and
gender-responsive governance according to the rule of law • National Legal Aid
Services Organization (NLASO) • Parliament • DANIDA • Swiss Agency for
Development and Cooperation • European Union • UNEP • UNV • UN-Women Indicative
Indicator  Increased rate of complaints and settlements cognizance by the NHRC
Baseline (2015): 46%, Target (2026): 60%; Source: NHRC, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator  Percentage of Union Parishads with access to  local
village court Baseline (2020): 32%, Target (2026): 76%; Source: Project MIS,
Frequency: Annual Indicative Indicator  National and subnational governments
have capacities to formulate gender-responsive policies, plans and budgets
Baseline (2020): No, Target (2026): Yes; Source: Project evaluation reports,
Frequency: Annual Output : CSOs, especially district CSO networks, oversight
bodies and the private sector are better able to participate meaningfully in
decision-making and to promote, protect and respect human rights and to fight
against discriminations Indicative Indicator  Number of CSOs, community-based
organizations, religious and youth organizations participating in citizen
engagement activities Baseline (2020): 24, Target (2025): total: 100, women’
organizations: 30, youth organizations: 50, Source: Project progress reports,
Frequency: Annual Indicative Indicator  Number of CSO coalitions formed to
advance human rights actions at grass-roots level Baseline (2020): , Target
(2026): 50, Source: Project report, Frequency: Annual Indicative Indicator
Number of government decisions and measures on promotion of tolerance and
inclusivity with inputs from CSOs supported by UNDP Baseline (2020): , Target
(2026): , Source: Project Progress reports, Frequency: Annual  Disaggregated
baseline data will be collected later in 2021 once the new phase of the
“Partnerships for  Tolerant, Inclusive Bangladesh” project starts 13