 BANGLADESH STRATEGIC PLAN ON AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL STATISTICS () June 2017
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) Statistics and Informatics Division (SID)
Ministry of Planning Secretary Statistics and Informatics Division (SID)
Ministry of Planning Government of the People’ Republic of Bangladesh FOREWORD
Its my pleasure to present you the Bangladesh Strategic Plan for Agricultural
and Rural Statistics-SPARS that was approved by Ministry of Planning on -The
Bangladesh SPARS translates the five core strategic goals with 37 output and 87
actions for improvement of agricultural and rural statistics synergized with the
goals of National Strategy for the Development of Statistics-NSDS, National
Agricultural Policy-NAP as well as 7th five year plans The SPARS was prepared
with the support of FAO in line with the Global Strategy to improve Agricultural
and Rural Statistics (GSARS)- global initiative that was developed under the
guidelines of United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) and was endorsed in 2012
by United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC) It will facilitate to buildup
strong basis of agriculture and rural statistics in the country to provide data
for monitoring Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The document is  living one
for the period of  and will be adjusted according to the changes in relevant
sector It covers all statistics somehow aligned with agricultural and rural
sectors with clear emphasis on crops, fisheries, livestock, agricultural
marketing, land water resource, forest and environment statistics The clear
roadmap that has been depicted in the document will help to improve statistics
related to above issues through implementation of stipulated actions The
reliable and timely data of agricultural and rural sector will contribute to the
development prospects of this sector in Bangladesh Dhaka June, 2017   Mozammel
Hoq Secretary  ACRONYMS ACPS Agriculture Crop Production Survey AMIS Agriculture
Market Information System BADC Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation
BARC Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council BARI Bangladesh Agricultural
Research Institute BB Bangladesh Bank BBS Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics BFD
Bangladesh Forest Department BMD Bangladesh Meteorological Department BRRI
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute BWDB Bangladesh Water Development Board CPI
Consumer Price Index DAE Department of Agricultural Extension DAM Department of
Agricultural Marketing DLS Department of Livestock Services DoF Department of
Fisheries EC Economic Census EPB Export Promotion Bureau FAO Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FBS Food Balance Sheet FPMU Food
Planning and Monitoring Unit GDP Gross Domestic Product GIS Geographical
Information System GSARS Global Strategy to Improve Agricultural and Rural
Statistics HIES Household Income and Expenditure Survey ICT Information and
Communication Technology IdCA In depth Capacity Assessment ISRT Institute of
Statistical Research and Training IT Information Technology LFS Labour Force
Survey II LUS Land Use Statistics MDG Millennium Development Goal MoA Ministry
of Agriculture MoD Ministry of Defence MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests
MoF Ministry of Food MoFL Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock MoLGRDC Ministry
of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperative MoP Ministry of Planning
MoWR Ministry of Water Resources NBR National Board of Revenue NQAF National
Quality Assurance Framework NSC National Statistical Council NSDS National
Strategy for the Development of Statistics NSO National Statistics Office NSS
National Statistical System PARIS 21 Partnership in Statistics for Development
in the 21st Century QNA Quarterly National Accounts SDG Sustainable Development
Goals SID Statistics and Informatics Division SMI Survey of Manufacturing
Industries SNA System of National Accounts SPARRSO Space Research and Remote
Sensing Organization SPARS Strategic Plan for Agriculture and Rural Statistics
UNSC United Nations Statistical Commission UNSD United Nations Statistics
Division III Contents FOREWORD   ACRONYMS  ii Executive Summary  vi CHAPTER :
INTRODUCTION    Importance of Agriculture and Rural Sector in Bangladesh
Emerging Needs for Strategic Plan on Agricultural and Rural Statistics    ARS to
measure achievements for Sustainable Development Goals   Broad parameters
adopted in development of SPARS    SPARS Process in Bangladesh   CHAPTER II:
INSTITUTIONS AND POLICY CONTEXT FOR ARS    Institutional Framework of National
Statistical System (NSS)    Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics    Aligned
Ministries and Departments    Coordination Mechanism in NSS    National Strategy
for the Development of Statistics-NSDS    National Plans (Perspective & Five
Year)    Sub Sector Policies    Policy Derivative on NSS    In-depth Capacity
Assessment of ARS  10 CHAPTER III: REVIEW OF ARS DATA SYSTEM  11  Overview of
Agriculture and Rural Statistics  11  Main Statistical Operations related to BBS
11  Major Gaps in ARS  12  Profile of Core data  12  Proposals of IdCA for
Improvement of ARS and their present status  12 Chapter IV: Vision, Mission,
Strategic Goals, Outputs and Activities for ARS 14  Planning Process  14  SPARS
Vision and Mission  14  SPARS Strategic Goals  14  Strategic Goals in SPARS of
Bangladesh  15  Goal-wise outputs and related strategic actions/activities  16
IV  Strategic Goal   16  Strategic Goal   18  Strategic Goal   21  Strategic
Goal   26  Strategic Goal   30 CHAPTER : IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING &
EVALUATION, FINANCING AND ADVOCACY  33  Implementation of SPARS  33  Monitoring
& Evaluation  33  Financing  34  Immediate External Resource requirement   34
Financing through Five Year Plans  34  Advocacy  34 References  35 ANNEX-: LIST
OF MINISTRIES/ORGANIZATIONS ALIGNED WITH ARS  36 ANNEX-II: INTEGRATED CENSUS AND
SURVEY CALENDAR  38 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS ()  40
Executive Summary Preparation of Strategic Plan for Agriculture and Rural
Statistics (SPARS) for Bangladesh has been done by adaptation of the process
followed in developing National Strategy for Development of Statistics (NSDS)
The approach provides opportunity to the users to assess the current status of
Agriculture and Rural Statistics, review data needs, evaluate the degree of
integration of the agricultural sector in the National Statistical System (NSS)
and develop  medium and long-term sustainable perspective addressing key
constraints in meeting data demands The Bangladesh SPARS is prepared in line
with Global Strategy to improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics (GSARS) The
GSARS was formulated by World Bank and FAO under the guidelines of United Nation
Statistics Division (UNSD) and that endorsed by United Nations Statistical
Commission (UNSC) in In line with Global Strategy, Bangladesh Bureau of
Statistics (BBS) carried out the In-depth Capacity Assessment (IdCA) program
with the support of FAO and published the report in The preparation of SPARS is
also the continuation of fulfillment of proposal  recommended in IdCA Countries
having the national plan on improvement of national statistical system have been
considered important in SDG document The SPARS is  living document for the
country to meet its medium to long term requirement for strengthening and
development of well-coordinated and integrated agriculture and rural statistics
system in cooperation with relevant ministries/departments as well as
international agencies The approach adopted ensures release of coherent,
reliable, internationally comparable and timely Agriculture and Rural Statistics
(ARS) The SPARS has given emphasis on development of professionalism in the
statistical work through regular training, introducing higher course in
statistics and close connection with Institute of Statistical Research and
Training (ISRT) of University of Dhaka and Bangladesh Agriculture University The
restructuring the Agriculture Wing of BBS as well as establishing statistical
cell in planning wing of all ministries and departments has also been
recommended Establishing good coordination among relevant ministries/agencies
are vividly discussed in SPARS Considering the importance of reliable statistics
for measuring SDG, National Five-Year Plan and other strategic plan, focus has
been given to best use of administrative data to lessen the burden on BBS as
well as to increase the use of administrative records as official statistics
Clear guidelines have been provided in SPARS to address the issue The Bangladesh
SPARS will help in ensuring availability of core indicators identified in
(GSARS)  census and survey calendar has been prepared (shown in Annexure-II) in
SPARS that will give clear idea of number of census and surveys important for
the country The SPARS also identifies the areas like best use of ICT
infrastructure for statistical purposes including data collection, processing
and dissemination It emphasized on continuous evaluation of data demand, common
data management system and data sharing protocols There are ten broad parameters
of SPARS itself that is explained in introduction These will help to understand
the processes of implementation of SPARS activities The SPARS has identified the
necessity of statisticians in preparing national plans for getting technical
support in assessing the progress of the plan VI Five Strategic Goals, 37
outputs and 87 strategic actions/activities have been identified in SPARS for
their achievement over the period 2016 to The Strategic Goals are as follows:
Strategic Goal : Improve competencies of National Statistical System to produce
and disseminate core set of ARS in accordance with international standards and
best practices Strategic Goal : Strengthen partnership and coordination among
Ministries / Departments and attain harmonized definitions and statistical
practices to efficiently produce coherent ARS Strategic Goal : Strengthen
capacity to adopt cost effective and scientific survey methodology using
sampling frame based on Censuses Strategic Goal : Develop  comprehensive human
resources and capacity building mechanism with corresponding organizational
setup to ensure participation in policy formulation Strategic Goal : Improve ICT
infrastructure, develop ICT applications for collection, compilation and
processing of ARS and establish Integrated Data Management and dissemination
system The document has been developed following Result based Management
approach Hence, Logical Framework has been developed to identify output() to be
achieved to meet each of the above mentioned strategic goals Further,
corresponding to each output, number of strategic actions/activities has been
identified For each activity to get completed, Objectively Verifiable Indicators
(OVI) has been identified These would be used for reporting progress of SPARS
Committee chaired by Secretary, Statistics and Informatics Division and co-
chaired by Director General, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics has been proposed
in SPARS for monitoring and evaluation of implementation of SPARS The committee
will evaluate the progress of it and provide direction for proper implementation
of SPARS VII CHAPTER : INTRODUCTION Bangladesh is the country with distinct
agricultural setting The substantial part of its typographically and
climatically diverse economy is set in the Sundarbans Delta, the largest delta
of the world It is the most populous country in the world with million
populations (2014) with high population density of 1063 person per sq km Sixty
six percent population lives in rural areas Agriculture is main occupation of
the working population with 45 percent being engaged in these activities
Contribution of agriculture in GDP is more than 15 percent in 2015-Its diverse
sub-sectors comprising of crops, livestock, fisheries and forests account for 55
%, 14%, 22 % and % respectively in its agriculture economy  Importance of
Agriculture and Rural Sector in Bangladesh  There is paramount importance of
agriculture and rural sector in Bangladesh to meet its diverse development
challenges The agriculture sector is the major contributor to sustained food,
nutrition and livelihood security of its large population to achieve self-
sufficiency in food production, reduce rural poverty and foster sustainable
economic development Development of agriculture in Bangladesh is therefore
accorded high priority by the Government with special emphasis on agriculture
related policies, planning and informed decision making In this process, the
need for scientific measurement of changes in agriculture related indicators is
duly recognized It has, therefore, emerged timely availability of quality data
on different aspects of the food and agriculture Meeting such data demand
requires concerted and organized efforts by various organizations dealing with
agriculture related issues The advancements in technology in capturing and
analysis of data have opened new frontiers to interpret, understand and infer
about the issues confronting the sector Statistical system is facing serious
challenges in meeting this rising demand There is  need to improve and
strengthen the system with specific focus on agricultural and rural statistics
Emerging Needs for Strategic Plan on Agricultural and Rural Statistics  Creation
of enabling conditions to improve statistical system and taking sustainable
measures to improve timely availability of quality statistics is at the centre
stage of strategies for increasing food security, reducing poverty and promoting
overall economic growth This aspect has been re-stressed in the 7th Five Year
Plan (SFYP) of Bangladesh One of the distinct features of contemporary planning
process in Bangladesh is the emphasis on building up evidence based decision
making and periodic monitoring and evaluation of development Towards this end,
FYP document has made particular mention on need to improve system of relevant
data in terms of quality, timeliness and adequacy  This distinctive recognition
of an efficient data system incidentally converges with the global context in
which GSARS is evolved under the aegis of United Nations The genesis of the GS
was in the experienced prevalence of general weakness in the timely availability
of quality statistics, resultant handicaps faced in decision making and
universally recognized need for desired set of direct and derived statistical
indicators on different aspects of sector for formulating programs and policies
The main objective of the GS is to reposition the national and international
agricultural and rural statistics systems to meet the requirements of various
stakeholders for monitoring of national and global development goals in synergy
with the national development priorities Bangladesh is one of the anchor
countries in the Asia-Pacific  region for GS implementation The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has provided necessary
support in this endeavour  One of the important elements of GS implementation is
to develop SPARS in accordance with the national priorities and development
plans, shared by all stakeholders The Bangladesh SPARS envisages strategizing
its goals for realization of GS objectives synergized with the national context,
and articulated in its vision and mission It includes  concrete plan of action
to implement it SPARS process provides  means to raise the profile of
agricultural and rural statistics, build  constituency for the future and ensure
that main priorities are agreed and shared by stakeholders  ARS to measure
achievements for Sustainable Development Goals1  Bangladesh is rigorously
working on Sustainable Development Goals to achieve targets by The goals address
broad range of issues These 17 SDGs has major emphasis on sustainable
development and has focus on issues like inequality, unsustainable consumption
patterns, weak institutional capacity, and environmental degradation The 2nd SDG
goal articulated as “End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition
and promote sustainable agriculture” directly concerns the agricultural and
rural development This goal has  series of targets to support the three
interrelated components: ending hunger, achieving food security, improved
nutrition and promoting sustainable agriculture There are 21 targets in all the
SDGs which have direct impact on agriculture related activities Achieving the
SDGs would be possible only if these targets are included in policy formulation,
planning, budgeting, programme development and implementation Therefore, there
is  need to produce the agriculture and rural statistics relevant to SDGs
keeping in view the importance of this sector in the context of Bangladesh
society and economy The SPARS provides an opportunity for developing pathway
towards taking agriculture development programmes for meeting the targets in SDG
and monitoring the achievements  Broad parameters adopted in development of
SPARS  The SPARS process is an adaptation of the process followed in developing
NSDS of Bangladesh The approach provides opportunity to the stakeholder to
assess the current status of statistics, review data needs, evaluate the degree
of integration of the agricultural sector in the National Statistical System
(NSS) and develop  medium and long-term and sustainable perspective addressing
key constraints and data demand Systematically designed SPARS, thus, will be
living document for the country to meet its medium to long term requirement of
strengthening well-coordinated and integrated agriculture and rural statistics
system, co-shared by its different stakeholders for their specific data needs
The SPARS has been developed keeping the following parameters in view: ()
Complementary to NSDS: The SPARS BD is  document complementary to NSDS goals
especially in the areas of agriculture statistics All the strategic goals and
activities therein have to be in consonance with implementation of NSDS (ii)
Medium and Long Term Strategic Plan: The SPARS is designed to integrate
agriculture and rural statistics into national statistical system Although this
is  continuous process, the activities envisaged are expected to start
immediately to achieve 1  strategic goals The activities are to be taken in such
manner that SPARS is fully implemented by (iii) Continuity: The SPARS has to be
implemented within the stipulated time frame But this will be  living document
and will be adjusted over time (iv) Reliability and Accessibility: Main focus of
the SPARS is to emphasize issues that will ensure the reliability of
disseminated data and its accessibility to the users Capacity Development for
Sound National Statistical System: Focus on the sound national Statistical
System has been given with due importance to agricultural and rural statistics
This will characterize professionalism in statistical work, organizational
reform, human resource management, efficiency, use of scientific methodology and
ensuring evidence-based decision making () (vi) Effective Coordination: Specific
strategies are to be built for achieving effective coordination between BBS and
ARS dealing Ministries (vii) Delineation Coverage of Agricultural and Rural
Statistics: The SPARS has to critically delineate the country specific scope and
coverage of agriculture and rural sector keeping connection with the guidelines
of Global Strategy (viii) Supply of Core Statistics: The SPARS has to emphasize
on supply of core set of agricultural and rural indicators based on relevant
census and survey data as well as administrative data This should support the
country perspective as well as five-year plan and sectoral plan and SDG
monitoring (ix) Data Analysis and Policy Interpretations: The SPARS would
provide mechanism for statistical analysis of census and survey data with
required policy interpretation for the policy makers International
Comparability: The SPARS would ensure adoption of UN Fundamental Principles of
official statistics as well as the guidelines of Global Strategy to ensure
international standards and comparability Survey Calendar and Log Frame
Analysis: The SPARS would have census and survey calendar clearly indicating the
core census and surveys essential for Agriculture and Rural Statistics and with
their periodicity () (xi) (xii) Monitoring of SPARS Implementation: For
implementation of SPARS,  committee chaired by Secretary, SID, Ministry of
Planning co-chaired by Director General, BBS has been proposed to monitor the
proper implementation of Strategic Actions to achieve Strategic Goals of
Bangladesh SPARS  SPARS Process in Bangladesh  Overall direction for preparation
of SPARS was given at the highest level of Government SPARS preparation is led
by the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS), Statistics and Informatics
Division (SID), Ministry of Planning, Government of Bangladesh The first phase
of launching the implementation of GS in Bangladesh commenced in December In
2014  comprehensive In-depth Capacity Assessment (IdCA)of its system of
Agriculture and Rural Statistics (ARS) and that of its national institutions
engaged in production of core ARS data was made by the BBS in close
collaboration with various departments of the Government of Bangladesh dealing
in subjects relating to agriculture and allied activities This was done with
technical support of FAO  SPARS has been designed and developed using two tier
structure There is  high level Steering Committee headed by Secretary, SID and
its members are senior officers from BBS and the line ministries dealing with
agricultural and rural statistics as well as data users This body  has all the
powers to approve and implement activities relating to SPARS This body is
assisted by  Technical Working Committee headed by Director General, BBS which
has members from the concerned data producing departments Director, Agriculture
Wing, of BBS is the National Coordinator for formulation of SPARS  Standardized
SPARS designing process gives due consideration to existing sub-sectoral
institutional and administrative structure and priorities and the statutory
framework of official statistics in the country It envisages determination of
in-country governance structure to oversee the integration of agriculture into
the NSS, identification of country specific set of core data items, existing
gaps in data availability, assessment of resources and methodologies in vogue,
the institutional and statistical methodology aspects related to integrate
agriculture into the NSS, application of information technology and data
management requirements Development of SPARS also ensures consistency and
complementarities of future investments and resources in the system and
sustainability of impact of interventions  The SPARS designing process started
through  consultation workshop under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Statistics
and Informatics Division (SID), Ministry of Planning in collaboration with all
stakeholders involved in generating ARS on 15 November, The workshop was
attended by 32 participants- 20 from BBS and SID and 12 from different
departments concerned with agriculture and allied activities The workshop
deliberated on issues, approaches, practices and institutional arrangements for
effective strategic planning for agriculture and rural statistics development
meeting was held on 26 November, 2015 chaired by DG, BBS where different issues
in preparing SPARS were discussed In  meeting on 30th March, 2016, draft SPARS
document was presented to the Technical Working Committee (TWC) which
constituted of 36 members from the different line departments The draft SPARS
was scrutinized in the meeting chaired by DG, BBS on 21 August, 2016 with all
Directors of the different wings and Project Directors, BBS, for incorporating
additional comments and further observations on the SPARS document Later on, the
document was sent to the relevant ministries/departments for
comments/suggestions and was improved accordingly This document along with the
earlier document was discussed in BBS in  meeting chaired by Director General,
BBS on  November, 2016 where all Directors of BBS, representatives of SID
Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock and concerned
agencies participated This document has been modified based on the suggestions
made in the meeting  The document on SPARS was placed before the Technical
Working Committee meeting on 23 February 2017 that was chaired by Director
General, BBS Representatives from all relevant ministries/departments were
present The document was widely discussed and finalized there The first meeting
of the Steering Committee headed by Secretary, Statistics and Informatics
Division was held on  May The final meeting of Steering Committee was held on 22
May 2017 and the SPARS was approved in that meeting After the approval of the
SPARS by the Government, the implementation of various activities under each
strategic goal shall commence  CHAPTER II: INSTITUTIONS AND POLICY CONTEXT FOR
ARS  Institutional Framework of National Statistical System (NSS)  After the
independence in 1971, the institutional strengthening and organizational
structuring in statistical system was done as the Government realized the
necessity of forming  strong national statistical organization Bangladesh Bureau
of Statistics was established in 1974 consolidating Bureau of Statistics under
Ministry of Planning, Population Census Commission under Ministry of Home
Affairs, Bureau of Agriculture Statistics and Agriculture Census Commission
under Ministry of Agriculture The Statistics Division was also formed under the
Ministry of Planning in 1975 to provide policy support and guidelines The
Statistics Division was further renamed as Statistics and Informatics Division
in 2013 with greater responsibilities The NSS Bangladesh has evolved as
centralized system with Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) is the lead and
nodal institution for generating, coordinating and disseminating official
statistics on various social and economic aspects of the country  BBS is the
major source of key agricultural and rural statistics It has experience in
conducting four agricultural censuses since the country’ independence The Annual
Survey on Crop Production is one of the priority surveys of the BBS, generating
annual area and production estimates for 126 crops, which include major crops
such as aus, aman, boro (three paddy crops), jute, potato and wheat The BBS also
collects price statistics and brings out price indices and other macroeconomic
aggregates  The NSS Bangladesh includes not only the BBS but also various
Ministries and public agencies that participate in collection and dissemination
of statistical data Decentralized and distinct administrative and management
responsibilities assigned to sub sectors of agriculture viz, crops, livestock,
fisheries, forestry etc has also resulted in decentralization in the statistical
system  Recently enacted Statistics Act, 2013 is an institutional milestone of
NSS in Bangladesh The Act entrusts the BBS with the responsibility for
collection, compilation, analysis, dissemination and coordination of all types
of statistics including agricultural statistics in the country in
methodological and timely manner The Act, in Clause Ga- mandated BBS to conduct
Population Census, Agriculture Census, Fisheries and Livestock Census and
Economic Census It also empowers BBS to conduct all types of surveys including
agriculture related and land use surveys It may be mentioned that an approval
from BBS will be required if any organization likes to conduct survey Thus, the
Act has entrusted BBS with the functions of supporting, coordinating and
endorsing the statistics generated and disseminated by other line ministries,
departments and organisations This, in the long run, is expected to streamline
the methodological and reporting differences of many key national statistics,
enhance credibility of statistics and improve access and availability to
different users and stakeholders  Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics  The BBS is
the National Statistical Office (NSO) authorized and mandated for collection,
processing, dissemination and coordination of almost all major official
statistics of national importance The key functions of BBS are to organize and
conduct national censuses & statistical sample surveys, management of human
resources their capacity development, create and organize  unified service for
all statistical personnel, advise and including  coordinate statistical works
for all offices of the government and authenticate statistics produced by the
other departments for maintaining statistical standards  Aligned Ministries and
Departments  Not all activities concerning agricultural statistics are carried
out by the BBS and there are also some important activities, such as generation
and dissemination of fisheries statistics that are organised in  decentralised
manner by the Department of Fisheries (DoF) under the Ministry of Fisheries and
Livestock (MoFL) On some other subjects, such as livestock and poultry,
generation of statistics is not regular and well-organised There are sporadic
and less statistically structured data collection/compilation activities carried
out by other agencies such as the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE),
Department of Agricultural Marketing (DAM), Ministry of Environment and Forest
(MoEF), Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation (BADC), Bangladesh Water
Development Board (BWDB) etc  Outside the NSO, very little statistical
activities are performed to generate data and even if they have been performed,
standard operating procedures are lacking Most noticeable statistical activities
in the line departments are by Department of Fisheries and Bangladesh Forest
Department The annual fisheries statistics of Bangladesh is released since 1982
by the Department of Fisheries (DoF) Statistics on forest area cover and forest
produce is generated through administrative procedures of Bangladesh Forest
Department Department of Livestock Services also uses statistics for its
subsector but there is no systematic statistical operation for this purpose
Ministry of Agriculture also undertakes surveys for monitoring of crops and
prices of commodities albeit without proper statistical considerations Ministry
of Water Resources has the mandate of management, development and efficient use
of water resources in the country Irrigation and water statistics is compiled by
the Ministry Information is regularly available for major irrigation projects
However, there are some methodological and use of appropriate classification
related issues in the data collected No information is at present available on
minor irrigation  Some of these statistics do get generated out of the
administrative procedures Important among these are statistics on agricultural
trade and rural credits (Bangladesh Bank), government budgetary support to
agriculture sector (Ministry of Finance) and rural infrastructures such as rural
electrification and communication  Different departments use statistics for
their respective sectoral requirements Most prolific user of ARS for informed
decision making is Food Planning and Monitoring Unit (FPMU), for its mandate to
manage food security situation in the country Besides data on availability of
food and its distribution in the country, FPMU is also concerned with the early
warning system on the domestic and international availability of food as well as
market indicators Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance are other
important user organisations of specified ARS statistics for informed decision-
making  list of user organizations along with source of data providing
organization is at Annex-  Coordination Mechanism in NSS  Prior to the
Statistics Act, 2013, the highest advisory body of the BBS was the National
Statistical Council to meet periodically to take broad policy decisions and
consider recommendations on collection, compilation and dissemination of
statistics In the provisions of the Statistics Act, the apex decision body to
approve the broad technical and policy issues of the  BBS is the Steering
Committee (SC), headed by the Secretary, Statistics and Informatics +ivision of
the Ministry of Planning There is  Technical Committee (TC) headed by the
Director General, BBS to look into technical details and operational issues
Besides these, inter- ministerial effort to synchronize statistics of greater
national interest is also underway  During the consultations for the NSDS it
became clear that the links between the BBS and other producers were very
limited and immediate improvements in coordination were needed NSDS also
considered for establishing the Statistical Cells of the BBS in the key line
departments The establishment of statistical cells is significant in data
production, to promote consultation and coordination and such cells are
envisaged to provide overall management and policy guidance to the ministries
and to review and harmonise all statistical concepts, classifications and
methods used by them in data collection, processing and dissemination
Furthermore, they will be responsible for compiling statistics from the data of
the respective ministry  The NSDS also provides for signing Memorandums of
Understanding (MOU) between the BBS and other agencies so as to build  strong
and sustainable relationship with them Furthermore, it seeks to use, where
possible, the field strength of the ministries/agencies during censuses or large
scale surveys, which will help accelerate the statistical work and improve data
quality at low cost  National Strategy for the Development of Statistics-NSDS
Focusing on the needs of all data users, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics
prepared the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS) in 2012
in consultation with  number of development partners and agencies The NSDS
document states that the Vision of NSS Bangladesh is to become  world-class
provider of authentic, relevant and timely data in  holistic and user-friendly
manner It inter alia promotes better generation and dissemination of statistics
and strengthens all statistical services so that they meet the needs of  rapidly
developing nation, ensuring availability of comprehensive and coherent
statistical data while making effective and efficient uses of national resources
The formulation of NSDS has taken note of strengths and weaknesses of the NSS
and stated the Mission of the NSS () to establish an integrated, professional,
efficient and effective national statistical system, under the guidance and
leadership of the BBS; and () to produce official statistics that meet the
current and evolving needs of national and international users in  transparent
and timely fashion, using international standards and the best statistical
practices Proposed NSDS priorities for the next ten years within the proposed
budget and capacity:  Focusing on improving the quality, coverage and use of
core statistics required for national planning, economic management and for
monitoring progress towards national goals Strengthening the professionalism of
the national statistical system, which involves: increasing the skills and
expertise of the work-force and increasing the proportion of the staff with
professional qualifications; providing strong professional leadership for BBS
and the statistical system generally; and developing and strengthening internal
procedures to make the statistical system more open and accountable and to build
trust in statistical products Enhancing capacity to collect, compile,
disseminate and, especially, use statistics at the local level, providing
statistical information to help empower the citizens of Bangladesh Promoting and
strengthening access to and the use of official statistics at all levels of
society, based on an “open-data” strategy ii iii iv   The NSDS is to be
implemented through the BBS with responsibility shared by its eight wings NSDS
recognizes the importance of coordination, both internally within BBS and
externally with other departments Strong coordination set up has been created in
BBS through  Committee chaired by Director General to monitor implementation of
activities under NSDS Directors of the BBS and Directors from other departments
are members of the committee  NSDS has also laid emphasis on improvement of
quality, coverage and timeliness of agriculture and related statistics using
latest ICT and space technology  During the consultations for the NSDS it became
clear that the links between the BBS and other producers were very limited and
immediate improvements in coordination were needed  NSDS also considered for
establishing the Statistical Cells of the BBS in the key line departments The
establishment of statistical cells is significant in data production, to promote
consultation and coordination and such cells are envisaged to provide overall
management and policy guidance to the ministries and to review and harmonise all
statistical concepts, classifications and methods used by them in data
collection, processing and dissemination Furthermore, they will be responsible
for compiling statistics from the data of the respective ministry  The NSDS also
provides for signing Memorandums of Understanding (MOU) between the BBS and
other agencies so as to build  strong and sustainable relationship with them
Furthermore, it seeks to use, where possible, the field strength of the
ministries/agencies during censuses or large scale surveys, which will help
accelerate the statistical work and improve data quality at low cost  National
Plans (Perspective & Five Year)  The 7th Five Year Plan (FYP), referencing 2016
– 20202 identifies the contemporary national priorities and the vision for the
development of agriculture sector to ensure food and nutritional security,
enhancement of sustainable intensification and diversification of climate
resilient agricultural production with increased commercialization, livelihood
improvement through technological innovations and use, strengthening of research
and extension system, developing marketing extension, value addition of
agricultural products, and linking farming community with markets, both local
and global National planning process assigns key role to subject Ministries to
implement government policies and programmes and in developing and implementing
projects  Despite several constraints faced by the farm sector and food security
concerns in the country, there has been encouraging response to the stimulus
provided by the successive Plans and sub sector policies  Sub Sector Policies
In addition to the National Agriculture Policy3formulated by the Ministry of
Agriculture and updated from time to time, respective policies on fisheries,
livestock, as well as environment and forestry are formulated and directed by
the respective Ministries This is in consonance with 2Seventh Five Year Plan
Fy2016 – Fy2020, Accelerating Growth, Empowering Citizens, General Economics
Division (GED), Planning Commission, Government of the People’ Republic of
Bangladesh, October 2015 3National Agriculture Policy, 2013, Bangladesh(  the
need to address the recent developments and the problems concerning the overall
food sector, involving different ministries and departments dealing with inputs,
resources, production and distribution of food commodities  The National Food
Policy for food management and food security connects with all these sub-sectors
policies The policies framed by different departments are synergised with the
overall planning and development priorities of the government The National Food
Policy envisages wider statistical input for addressing food management and food
security Statistics not only relating to crop production and the inputs and
resources used for crop production but also to distribution, availability,
access and consumption by the people are required Accordingly, the plan of
action for the Food Policy has statistical input on the aspects of marketing,
storage, prices, distribution and availability not only from domestic production
but in the situation of deficit availability from imports or other sources,
stocks, employment, income and consumption of diversified food for proper
nutrition  Policy Derivative on NSS  There is an expanding demand for statistics
The 7th FYP expressed the limitation of quality and timely data experienced in
the past It has invoked an inbuilt mechanism of Result Based Monitoring and
Evaluation of set targets and goals entrusting Planning Commission the focal
point of  &  Strategy and specifying prime role of BBS to generate data and
indicators and its analysis for the purpose  brief of agriculture sectoral
strategies and policies in 7th FYP, summarised in table below supplements the
SPARS development in consonance with the sub sector requirement Table : Synopsis
of Agriculture Sub-sector Policies and Strategies for 7th FYP Crops Livestock
Fisheries Forestry Cross Cutting issues weather prediction and forecasting
Sustainable Agriculture and Green Growth Dairy & Poultry development Open water
fisheries management Forest conservation and plantations Meat Production Inland
aquaculture Forest produce management – wood , non-wood Research, gender, HRD,
Crop Zoning Breed Development Shrimp and coastal aquaculture Land Use Planning
pest disease management, Livestock Research Agro & Social forestry Agricultural
Inputs Marine Fisheries and Exploring Blue Economy Veterinary Services and
Animal Health Credit and Extension, Agro-Processing; Precision Agriculture
Forest land survey and land records Diversification – Horticulture Feeds, Fodder
and Animal Management Protection of forest eco system Value Chain development
Good Agricultural Practices Water use Efficiency Hides and Skins Watershed
management Farm Mechanization   In-depth Capacity Assessment of ARS  The
recently completed In depth Capacity Assessment (IdCA) to produce Agriculture
and Rural Statistics in Bangladesh as  part of implementation of Global Strategy
to improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics (GSARS) reviewed all the major
statistical activities relating to agriculture and rural sector carried out by
BBS and the line departments, their methodologies, data users’ needs and gaps,
data duplication and resources availability in different agencies  The review
brought to notice the strengths and weakness in NSS in producing agricultural
statistics The IdCA also took note of the issue of duplication in crop
production estimates by BBS and Ministry of Agriculture Some of the user
departments found to be lacking appreciation of statistics in their respective
fields of work  The comprehensive assessment has been made in the context of
minimum set of core data and its availability The identified core data are
mapped on the agencies, responsible for their generation Several datasets
relating to minor crops, livestock, fisheries, forestry, farm-gate prices and
data on environment were observed to be suffering from one or more deficiencies
Some key observations from the IdCA capacity assessment synthesis are
availability of strong legal framework and existence of appropriate institutions
to produce ARS which is in consonance with the observation of NSDS It has,
however, identified need for  separate strategy for agriculture statistics
removing financial and human resource constraints, specially training and
capacity development It has also recognized the need for capacity development in
user departments to strengthen agricultural market and price information,
fisheries and livestock and water statistics Gaps in several core data and the
statistics also needed to be addressed to prepare food balance sheets, commodity
balances for crops, stocks, livestock, and agro- environmental indicators 10
SWOT Analysis of Agricultural and Rural Statistics In Bangladesh, the national
statistical system is strong in many respects, though there is much scope to
strengthen the system The Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats of
this system are shown below in brief; Strengths Statistical Act, 2013 National
Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS) In-depth Capacity Assessment
completed Available Experts in BBS  Synergies with 7th Five Year Plan and SDGs
Opportunities Integration of Agriculture Statistics with NSS  Initiative of FAO
and other International Organizations  Country wide Organizational Set up
Dominance of Agriculture Sector Weaknesses Weak Organizational Setup Inadequate
Manpower  Non-availability of Statisticians in different Ministries/Departments
Threats Lack of Fund Lack of Coordination among Ministries/Departments  Report
of IdCA Bangladesh can be accessed at  of-bangladesh-to-produce-agricultural-
and-rural-statistics 10 CHAPTER III: REVIEW OF ARS DATA SYSTEM  Overview of
Agriculture and Rural Statistics  Profile of agricultural and rural statistics
has expanded in coverage over years This now includes crops, livestock,
fisheries and forestry cross cutting with the economic, social and environmental
dimensions Besides the activities, production, size and magnitude of farm
entrepreneurship, the aspects of trade, resources, inputs, processing, prices,
infrastructure demographic and social economic aspects of well-being, macro-
economic indicators and environmental data relating to land water and air now
fall under the ambit of ARS This diverse data dimension on one hand is to meet
requirements of different stakeholders on the other hand it has to provide
meaningful inference to address the aspects of food, livelihood security and
well-being of the people  There is expectation from the system of ARS to provide
coherent and consistent set of data Traditionally the system of ARS was seen
from the perspective of crop statistics In the contemporary context, the
statistics on subsectors of livestock and fisheries, production system and
market information, value addition, consumption, income, employment have also
become significant These statistics need to be sourced from several statistical
operations Some of these statistical operations such as population, economic and
agricultural censuses, crop surveys, social economic surveys and administrative
reporting systems are carried out by the NSO and remaining information may be
provided by other agencies Such statistical operations together form the system
of ARS There remains considerable unmet demand of data in the system  The
limitations and constraints in the NSS in general and system of ARS in
particular have often surfaced in recent years The plan to improve system of ARS
having multiplicity of the institutions and statistical operations with the
respective strengths and weaknesses necessitates strategic thinking and approach
Main Statistical Operations related to BBS  Main statistical operation to
generate statistics on agriculture and rural sector is the Agriculture Census
periodically conducted by the BBS There is considerable improvement in the
conduct of decennial Agriculture Census over the years The Agriculture Census
2008 was fourth in the series and was more comprehensive in geographic and data
coverage to provide several benchmark indicators on the aspects of farm and non-
farm, rural urban operational holdings in size class, land and crop use with
irrigation and variety particulars, livestock holdings and livestock population,
some aspects of fisheries, agricultural labourer, farm machinery etc The
population and economic censuses are also major statistical operations providing
statistics on select social and economic dimensions of ARS  Amongst the surveys
generating ARS, Agricultural Crop Production (ACP) survey conducted by BBS is
one of the main source of national and sub-national estimates of crop area and
production for 126 crops For six major crops, Aus, Aman and Boro paddy and jute,
wheat and potato, the yield estimates are based on crop cutting experiments ACP
adopts household interview approach to estimate area of all the crops and yield
for the remaining 120 minor crops  Other statistical operations by BBS
concerning ARS are ad-hoc surveys on cost of cultivation for select crops,
survey for crop forecast for major crops, household surveys on income
expenditure for determination of prevalence of poverty, labour force surveys and
computation of national accounts that includes agriculture as sub sector in GDP
11  The BBS also holds responsibility of dissemination of ARS through
publications, survey reports and through its website BBS is the nodal agency for
human resource management of statistical professionals engaged with NSO and also
associated with ARS and foster partnership for development and improvement in
methodologies  Major Gaps in ARS In IdCA, all the major statistical activities
carried out by BBS and the line departments, their methodologies, data users’
needs and gaps, data duplication, resources availability in different agencies,
were reviewed with  view to identifying strengths and weakness in NSS in
producing agricultural statistics Several data relating to minor crops,
livestock, fisheries, forest data, price data and data on environment have been
observed to be suffering from one or more deficiencies, as summarised in the
table below: Table : Data Gap Analysis undertaken in IdCA Data issue Core Data
Crop statistics, Major crops, Employment, HCI, Animal feed, CPI, Demographic
Agro-processing, Commodity prices, Food stock, Food balance sheet, Environmental
data Forestry, Trade, Fertilisers, Pesticides, Seeds, Govt expenditure, rural
infrastructure Agriculture machinery Core data collected Core data not
collected/ partially collected Core data collected only through administrative
process Core data collected but not at needed frequency Core data collected but
precision is lower than demanded Core data collected but methodology lacks
soundness Core data disseminated with projections on baseline Core data by
multiple agencies Crop statistics, Minor crops Fisheries, Water use, CPI, rural
infrastructure, Land cover and Land use Livestock and poultry, Trade Crop
statistics, Major and minor crops, Livestock and poultry, Trade, Land cover and
Land use  Profile of Core data  core set of indicators has been identified in
Global Strategy to improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics Country specific
core data has also been identified for Bangladesh in In-depth Capacity
Assessment report  Proposals of IdCA for Improvement of ARS and their present
status Based on the assessment made during the preparation of In Depth Country
Assessment report on Agriculture and Rural Statistics, eight proposals were made
for their immediate implementation 12 Progress of proposals of In-depth Capacity
Assessment report is given below: No Proposals in IdCA Present status
Development of  Strategic Plan for the improvement of Agricultural and Rural
Statistics (SPARS) in Bangladesh Bangladesh SPARS has been prepared with the
support of FAO and going to be finalized within short time II crop estimation
the Strengthening forecasting and crop system, crop monitoring crops promoting
in the process, the use of upfront technologies of GIS and remote sensing
Existing crop production estimation forecasting methodology and crop methodology
new and reviewed through methodology recommended Agriculture Market Information
System project supported by FAO The fund is basically provided by BMGF BBS is
going to conduct Agriculture (Crop, fisheries & Livestock) Census in census and
survey calendar for ARS has been developed and recommended in Bangladesh SPARS
important for III Developing an integrated framework of census and surveys for
the agriculture and crops, livestock, fisheries, inland water bodies and other
such related areas covering sector rural IV Strengthening analytical capacity of
institutions involved in the production rural and use of agricultural and
statistics to better use the data for management of the sector, policy making
and monitoring progress BBS is working on the issue under various be streamlined
activities needs to  the mechanism Strengthening of coordination, documentation,
research and analysis in the NSS for improving agricultural and rural statistics
Comprehensive coordination mechanism has been developed in that will be
Bangladesh SPARS implemented VI Human Capacity Building Process of
reorganization of BBS is going on Seminar, workshop and training was conducted
under AMIS project BBS will initiate for other regular training with the support
of government fund Use of ICT in agriculture statistics for data collection will
be partly done by government fund This will require more effort VII Promoting
ICT applications in agricultural and rural statistics including of appropriate
promoting technology, hardware and software resources, digitisation of survey
frames, data management, national data centre, data dissemination and user
interface use VIII Sensitising respondents and users for building up trust and
reputation of statistical products Small scale activities are going on More
initiative is needed 13 Chapter IV: Vision, Mission, Strategic Goals, Outputs
and Activities for ARS  Planning Process  The strategic evolution of
comprehensive plan of action for sustainable strengthening of agriculture and
rural statistics involves consultative synthesis of national statistical system
and its institutional framework This also addresses diverse data demand of the
multifaceted agriculture and rural sector in the perspective of national plan
and development policies This document has prioritised statistical activities to
be performed in medium to long term in an integrated manner The Strategic Plan
has to be cost-effective and should meet the expectations of different
stakeholders Following the approach of NSDS, the SPARS has defined mission and
vision statement for Agriculture and Rural Statistics System followed by its
strategic goals, outputs and the activities to be taken up to achieve targets
Thus, the SPARS is  results based plan of activities resulting in outputs
meeting strategic goals and ultimately achieving mission and vision of SPARS
SPARS Vision and Mission  Based on the discussion with stakeholders comprising
of users and producers of agriculture and rural statistics the following
reflects the Vision of Agriculture and Rural Statistics System in Bangladesh The
Vision of SPARS is: Agriculture and Rural Statistics System is to be  well-
coordinated, integrated and efficient system conforming the requirements of
stakeholders international standards and meeting to  To achieve this vision, the
mission of the system is the following: The Mission of SPARS is: in  Produce and
disseminate agricultural and rural statistics (ARS) transparent, timely and user
friendly manner, adopting international standards, best practices and latest
technologies through strengthening the capacity of producers with human and
financial resources to meet contemporary and evolving needs  SPARS Strategic
Goals  The SPARS planning process is basically aimed at helping the stakeholders
of agricultural statistics system to identify achievable goals reflecting the
reality as highlighted in the assessment of the current status of the
agricultural statistical system and designed to accomplish 14 above stated
vision and mission Core element of SPARS is identification of strategic goals
and related outputs that are aimed to be accomplished in  realistic and feasible
manner in the implementation phase (-10 years)  Considering the multiplicity of
the factors and crosscutting issues identified in the assessment, the strategic
goals are identified keeping in view the multi-dimensional aspects of
institutions, statistical operations and methodologies dovetailed to subsector
characteristics, human resource and infrastructure, technology and interface
with stakeholders and development partners  Strategic Goals in SPARS of
Bangladesh  The strategic goals of SPARS have been determined on the basis of
need of the sector consistent with Statistics Act, 2013, National Strategy for
the Development of Statistics (NSDS) and the In-depth capacity Assessment Report
on Agriculture and Rural Statistics of Bangladesh The following strategic goals
have been identified for Agriculture and Rural Statistics (ARS) development in
Bangladesh Strategic Goals of SPARS ➢ Strategic Goal : Improve competencies of
National Statistical System to produce and disseminate core set of ARS in
accordance with international standards and best practices ➢ Strategic Goal :
Strengthen partnership and coordination among Ministries / Departments and
attain harmonized definitions and statistical practices to efficiently produce
coherent ARS ➢ Strategic Goal : Strengthen capacity to adopt cost effective and
scientific survey methodology using sampling frame based on Censuses ➢ Strategic
Goal : Develop  comprehensive human resources and capacity to ensure building
mechanism with corresponding organizational setup participation in policy
formulation ➢ Strategic Goal  : Improve ICT infrastructure, develop ICT
applications for collection, compilation and processing of ARS and establish
Integrated Data Management and dissemination system 15  Goal-wise outputs and
related strategic actions/activities  Strategic Goal : Improve competencies of
National Statistical System to produce and disseminate core set of ARS in
accordance with international standards and best practices The capability of BBS
and Ministries/departments dealing in agriculture related subjects is to be
strengthened in producing useful and reliable statistics There is also need to
promote statistics friendly attitude amongst the staff in these Ministries To
produce reliable statistics, National Quality Assurance Framework for all the
census and surveys need be developed There is also need to establish system of
maintaining Statistical Business Process Model (SBPM) in all ARS Obligation in
following the QAF will increase the credibility of statistics and would ensure
international comparability FAO recommended core set of indicators have suitably
adapted in the context of the country There has to be awareness of these
indicators amongst relevant Ministries/Departments so that these indicators
could be used for achieving targets, and for monitoring and evaluation of
progress These indicators should also be available to other stakeholders As BBS
has the legal mandate to produce all basic indicators of all the sectors, it
also has the responsibility to support and coordinate the statistical activities
carried out by other Ministries/Departments and finally endorse these products
It is essential to ensure the ARS generated in the country is internationally
comparable For this, it is necessary that recommendations of FAO for conducting
census and surveys and the guidelines and statistical principles set by UNSD are
strictly followed It is also necessary to assess and utilize the experiences and
good practices of other countries These experiences are shared through relevant
Global and Regional Committees and therefore participation in these committees
would be useful for improvement of competencies of ARS in the country Outputs
under the goal: Competencies of NSS strengthened Enhanced use of official
statistics in planning/decision making process All ARS data follow international
standards and quality National Quality Assurance Framework for ARS developed
Core-set of indicators available according to GSARS Updated methodologies/best
practices followed by other countries adopted () (ii) (iii) (iv) () (vi) Output
Competencies of NSS strengthened Statistics Act, 2013 has been enacted in the
country to strengthen the National Statistical System (NSS) so that the policy
and decision making process in the Government becomes evidence based The NSDS
has identified the process of strengthening the NSS including Agriculture and
Rural statistics The primary goal of SPARS is to develop strategy for
improvement of 16 agriculture and rural statistics As this sector is concerned
with the large number of Ministries and Departments, it is important to
establish organisational set-up in those ministries/department to smoothly
deliver the reliable statistics in timely manner Strategic actions/activities:
() Produce and disseminate reliable and timely agriculture (ii) Use up-to-date
methodologies in surveys and censuses (iii) Provide guidance to other
organizations producing statistics (iv) Improve professionalism of BBS personnel
() Meet the demand of stakeholders properly Output  Enhanced use of official
statistics in planning process For using the statistical findings and its
application properly, it is recommended to ensure involving statisticians in
preparing the perspective plan as well as the sectoral plan to make it target
oriented Statisticians will set tools there to monitor and evaluate for
measuring progress The idea is to ensure use of base data for monitoring
progress Strategic actions/activities: () (ii) (iii) Enhance involvement of
statisticians in preparing sector-specific plan Involve statisticians in
medium/long term planning document of the country Ensure enhanced use of
official statistics in administrative management Output  All ARS data ensure
international standards and quality It is essential to ensure the data
internationally comparable For this, it requires following the recommendations
of FAO for conducting census and surveys and the guidelines and statistical
principles set by UNSD It is also important to follow experiences and good
practices of other countries shared and disseminated through relevant Global and
Regional Committees Strategic actions/activities: Review the concepts,
definitions adopted in collection of ARS in BBS and aligned ministries/agencies
Follow the principles of official statistics set by UNSD Review statistical
process adopted in producing ARS Assess quality of ARS produced and suggest
methods for improvement () (ii) (iii) (iv) Output : National Quality Assurance
Framework for ARS developed To produce reliable statistics, common census and
survey Framework need to be developed describing all the essentials of QAF This
will establish the system of maintaining Statistical Business Process Model
(SBPM) in all statistical undertakings of the country The mere obligation in
following the QAF will increase the credibility of statistics and ensure
international comparability 17 Strategic actions/activities: Identify
international standards and guidelines for each ARS product Evaluation of
existing process for generation of the product in the context of international
guidelines () (ii) Output  Core set of indicators available according to GSARS
The core-set of indicators will be acquainted to the relevant
ministries/departments so that they can use these data for achieving targets,
and for monitoring and evaluation purposes The FAO recommended core-set of
indicators must be available to the stakeholders As BBS has the legal mandate to
produce all basic indicators of all the sectors, BBS also has the
responsibilities to support and coordinate the statistical activities carried
out by other ministries/departments and finally endorse it Thus, the core list
of indicators can be available through the strengthening of NSS Strategic
actions/activities: () (ii) (iii) Conduct new survey and taking proper steps to
transform administrative records into Evaluate existing data availability to
GSARS Identify data gap to GSARS official statistics Output  Updated
methodologies/best practices followed by other countries adopted BBS has to
ensure introducing updated methodologies and best practices followed by the
reputed National Statistical Organizations in other countries The regular
cooperation and negotiations will be required to improve the quality of
activities of BBS This can be done through arranging training with foreign
experts, study visit, implementing MoU and so on Strategic actions/activities:
() (ii) (iii) Organize/participate in national/international seminars on
methodological issues (iv) Involve academia/experts in designing and
implementing census/surveys Adopt updated methodologies/best practices followed
by other countries Review and improve existing methodologies used by BBS in
regular interval  Strategic Goal : Strengthen partnership and coordination among
Ministries / Departments and attain harmonized definitions and statistical
practices to produce coherent ARS Establishing partnership between BBS and other
line ministries at an optimum level is the key factor to develop agricultural
statistics For the whole agriculture sector, production statistics of crops,
fisheries and livestock and their prices are very important For this, strong
coordination among BBS, DAE, DoF, DLS, and DAM is required NSDS has clearly
recommended maintaining good coordination with line ministries/departments
through Memorandum of 18 Understanding (MoU) BBS will start working immediately
with DAE, DoF, DLS and DAM Statistics Act, 2013 has mandated BBS to produce
official statistics It also empowered BBS in streamlining the data generated by
line ministries BBS is to support, coordinate and endorse the data generated by
other line ministries/departments to avoid data duplication in government
agencies Outputs under the goal: () (ii) (iii) Harmonized concepts and
definitions used by all ministries/agencies of ARS (iv) More administrative data
used as official statistics () Efficient production of coherent and consistent
agriculture and rural statistics Improved coordination between BBS and other
data producing agencies of ARS Increased participation of stakeholders for
assessing data demands Output : Efficient Production of coherent and consistent
agriculture Statistics The primary goal of SPARS is to produce coherent and
consistent agriculture and rural statistics One of the key factors for
development of ARS is close partnership and coordination of BBS with agriculture
related Ministries There is  need to form  committee duly recognized under the
Statistics Act, 2013 for coordination and monitoring the process of
implementation of SPARS There is also need to issue  notification/ Government
order from BBS clearly stating the statistical products to be brought out by
each Ministry/Department in agriculture related activities along with
periodicity and timeliness Strategic actions/activities: () (ii) Development of
integrated calendar for Census and surveys for ARS Organize regular training
with updated manual for field staff Output  Improved Coordination among data
producing agencies of ARS To achieve better coordination among agencies engaged
in production of ARS, it is necessary to prepare  compendium of standard
concepts and definition used in ARS This would be required to be prepared in
close cooperation and consultation with all the concerned departments BBS will
have to take the responsibility of bringing out this compendium In this process,
inconsistent definitions, if any, would also get streamlined and uniform and
internationally accepted definition would be adopted and used for future data
collection and dissemination Preparation of MoU among other related ministries
/departments will facilitate to improve the quality of ARS product According to
the responsibilities stipulated in MoU, coordination with related departments
will be done The MoU can be prepared on the basis of following matrix; 19 Survey
Name Implementing Agency Sl No  Line Deptt DAE Areas of Coordination
Preparation of SF  Preparation of Survey Crop Area and Yield Survey (Annual)
Fish Production Survey (Annual) Livestock Survey for Main Livestock (Annual) of
on Price Survey Agricultural Produces BBS Calendar  DoF DoF  Preparation of
Table  Preparation of Survey  BBS DLS Manual  Training at headquarter  DAM DAM &
field offices  Supervision activities  Finalizing Report BBS will initiate this
immediately to follow This mechanism will be implemented with other
ministries/departments gradually This process will contribute practicing
harmonized concepts and definitions and establishing statistical standards
Strategic actions/activities: () Setting up coordinating body under the
Statistics Act, 2013 on all matters relating to ARS Establish partnership with
ministries/ departments and delegation of responsibility relating to production
and release of ARS to each concerned ministry/ department (ii) (iii) Establish
coordination through MoU for defining responsibilities (iv) Appoint focal point
official of line ministry/department to BBS for coordination Output  Harmonized
concepts and definitions used by all ministries/agencies of ARS BBS has to take
initiative to harmonize the concepts and definitions related to ARS that is used
by different ministries and departments This activity is prime to avoid
discrepancies of data among the agencies Necessary publication on all the
definitions and concepts will be prepared and circulated Strategic
actions/activities: () (ii) Prepare compendium of standard concepts and
definitions on ARS Update concepts and definitions in accordance with the
recommendations of international agencies (iii) Conduct review meeting with
stakeholder Output  More administrative data used as official statistics Optimum
coordination between BBS and other ARS related ministries/departments will
increase the use of administrative data as official statistics BBS will ensure
necessary support and guidance other agencies to keep their administrative
records systematically and preparing own data bank This will minimize the burden
on BBS to generate official statistics 20 Strategic actions/activities: ()
Develop new statistical products from administrative system of agriculture
related ministries Collaborate line ministries/agencies to preserve
administrative records systematically (ii) Output  Increased participation of
stakeholders for assessing evolved data demands BBS needs to institutionalize
the mechanism for continuous assessment of data demand of stakeholders For this,
BBS can organize consultation workshop on stakeholder’ opinion Assessment of
data needs through structured questionnaire is essential instrument to identify
current data needs BBS needs to be familiarized with the changing concepts and
domains of agricultural activities The sustainable agriculture and the Good
Agricultural Practices (GAP) are the issues like that BBS needs to collect this
type of data to facilitate decision making process through providing data on
current issues and practices Strategic actions/activities: () Conduct ad-hock
survey on data demand (ii) Organize meeting/consultation workshop on use of
agricultural and rural statistics (iii) Assess SDG indicators/other relevant
policy documents and determine data gap  Strategic Goal : Strengthen capacity
and adoption of cost effective and scientific survey methodology using sampling
frame based on Censuses To achieve the goal, the following ten (outputs) are
planned to be generated These outputs will be achieved by set of activities
described in each case Outputs under the goal: () Structural data on crops,
livestock and fisheries are available generated from related censuses Sampling
Frames using census data base for annual survey on production of crop, fisheries
and livestock developed (ii) (iii) Census and Survey Calendar related to ARS
followed (iv) Annual Crop production survey conducted using improved methodology
() Annual fish production survey conducted using improved methodology (vi)
Annual livestock production survey conducted using improved methodology (vii)
Annual survey on livestock resources, input cost of crops, fisheries and
livestock conducted using improved methodology (viii) Annual food balance sheet
prepared (ix) () (xi) Survey on private food grain stock (supply and value
chains) conducted Survey on irrigation system conducted Survey on land use
conducted 21 (xii) Survey on forest product conducted (xiii) New databases to
measure Natural Resources (land, Water and Air) changes developed Output
Structural data on crops, livestock and fisheries are available generated from
relevant censuses The most important activity for conduct of scientifically
designed sample survey is to carry out Agriculture Census BBS has been
conducting agriculture census decennially to collect, compile and disseminate
data on structural changes of agriculture sector over long period of time
Statistics at division/district/upazila/union/ mauza levels To measure inter-
censal annual changes, sample surveys are being conducted to provide estimates
with minimum time, cost and effort The statistical sample survey methodology
adopted for the purpose provides information close to actual information This
information is effectively used in estimation of value addition of sector to
GDP, food management, monitoring and evaluation of sectoral progress and policy/
plan formulation from generated disseminated agriculture census also is BBS is
planning to conduct next Agriculture Census in 2018 covering crops, fisheries,
livestock, and forestry and environment sectors in an integrated manner
following modular approach to data collection This approach will be cost-
effective for generating reliable ARS and will increase the scope for analysis
covering social, economic and environmental dimension of activities in the sub-
sectors This integrated approach to Census and Survey planning will facilitate
establishment of sampling frames to support future surveys The forthcoming
Agriculture Census is intended to comply with the recommendations of FAO World
Programme for Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) which is for the period 2016-The
modular approach proposed to be followed in Agriculture Census 2018 will be an
extension of the modular approach used in the last Agriculture Census 2008 with
view to capture more data on items keeping in view the demands from sub-sectors
of fishery and livestock The census will be designed keeping in view follow-up
surveys Core Census module will collect data on structural items which will be
more or less the same as the Agriculture Census 2008 so as to allow measurement
of change since the last census Key questions on fisheries, livestock and
forestry will be included to provide crucial structural data on these sectors
Strategic action/activity: () Conduct agriculture census covering crops,
fisheries and livestock sub-sectors Output  Sampling Frames using census data
base for annual survey on production of crop, fisheries and livestock developed
One of the essential prerequisite for conducting scientifically designed
statistical surveys is the Sampling Frame  suitably designed Census provides
such frames for follow up surveys for more detailed data aspects Considering
very large data requirement on the diverse aspects of crops, livestock and
fisheries and the gaps and limitations in the existing data system, it is 22
envisaged to develop sample frames from the agriculture census The annual
production survey on crop, fisheries and livestock, cost of production and other
agriculture related household and farm survey would be conducted on the basis of
master sample frame There has been recommendation of FAO that follow up surveys
should be carried out using Sample frames which may help integrate data on
different aspects Further, issues relating to food security or poverty can be
properly understood only if it is possible to analyse the data in comprehensive
manner However, keeping in view the conditions in each country some integration
should be achieved BBS itself will prepare sampling frames for annual crop
production, fisheries and livestock and other related survey with the adequate
involvement of DAE, DoF and DLS Strategic actions/activities: () Develop
Sampling Frames to meet requirement of crop, livestock, fishery and forest
surveys Establishing  Census /Survey Methodology Wing in BBS for guiding the
survey designs for the surveys to be carried out by BBS and other ministries/
department (ii) Output  Census and Survey Calendar related to ARS followed To
facilitate long term sectoral plan, food management, estimating contribution to
GDP and market price data available, there should be programme of census and
survey that would be conducted regularly or ad-hock basis Keeping this into
consideration the evolved census/survey calendar (appendix-) needs to be
followed Strategic action/activity: () Conduct Agriculture, Fisheries and
Livestock Census and other necessary Surveys following Census/survey calendar
Develop methodology and generate data on good agricultural practices (ii) Output
Annual crop production survey conducted using improved methodology The economic
contribution of crop sub-sector to Gross Domestic Production annual crop
production estimation is inevitable For the sake of accurate GDP calculation,
the annual crop production (acreage, yield and total production data and their
economic value needs to be calculated using improved methodology BBS has taken
substantial steps to improve crop estimation methodology with the support of FAO
This also includes production forecasting fore casting and crop monitoring The
survey method has been recommended for crop forecasting On the other hand, using
econometric model as well as RS data is also recommended for crop forecasting 23
Strategic action/activity: () Design and prepare sampling frame and conduct
annual crop production survey Output  Annual fish production survey conducted
using improved methodology The annual production of fish is required for many
purposes One of them is to know the economic value for GDP calculation The
Department of Fisheries is currently providing this estimation using the
methodology as well as sample design that requires being up-dated After the
Agriculture Census 2018, the new sampling frame will be reconstructed for
reliable and authentic estimates of annual fish production Department of
Fisheries will have to take support from BBS in this regard Strategic
actions/activities: () Design and prepare sampling frame and conduct annual fish
production survey (inland) Generate annual production of marine fish (ii) Output
Annual livestock production survey conducted using improved methodology
Bangladesh has been facing serious difficulty in getting latest and current
information on output of livestock products At present the information for years
subsequent to the year Agriculture Census is carried out, is projected based on
past trends and other ancillary information This does not reflect the correct
situation There is  need to take up specific annual survey for the purpose Thus,
the activity for the purpose is to design and implement Integrated Sample Survey
for Livestock Products BBS may do this with close cooperation of Department of
Livestock Services Strategic action/activity: () Design integrated sampling
frame for livestock and conduct annual survey Output  Annual surveys on input
costs of crops, fisheries and livestock conducted using improved methodology
Survey on cost of production is used mainly for the purpose of government
procurement and for GDP calculations (value addition issues) As it is very
important BBS needs to conduct regular input cost survey for major cereal crops
and input cost survey for other crops, fisheries and livestock with certain
periodicity to improve this information For improvement of these estimates, FAO
guidelines on input cost survey may be useful Strategic actions/activities: ()
(ii) (iii) Design and conduct input cost survey for livestock production on
regular interval Design and conduct annual input cost survey for major cereals
and other crops Design and conduct input cost survey for production of fish on
regular interval 24 (iv) Design and conduct survey on supply chain and value
chain of crops, fisheries and livestock production Design and conduct livestock
resources survey on half decadal basis () Output  Annual food balance sheet
prepared Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics has recently prepared Food Balance
Sheet for the years 2009 to 2013 under the support of Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) of United Nations This work has to be continued and annual
Food Balance sheet should be prepared for each year  time line in this regard
also should be decided Strategic action/activity: () Prepare food balance sheet
annually Output  Survey on Private Food Grain Stock conducted In consideration
of supporting the scientific food management, annual/ad hock survey on
measurement of private stock of food grain in essential BBBS is conducting this
survey for the first time in 2017 with support of FAO BBS may follow the
guidelines provided by FAO describing the sapling frame/methodology and the
questionnaire of this survey This survey is crucial as the marketable surplus of
food grain can be known through this survey Strategic action/activity: ()
Conduct annual/ad-hock survey on private stock of food grain survey on supply
and value chain Output 10 Survey of irrigation systems conducted Bangladesh has
regularly compiled information related to major large irrigation projects The
information from these projects relates to area cultivated, type of crops etc
However, the information on irrigation by minor irrigation systems is not
captured There is  need to carry out such survey so that comprehensive
information on irrigation is available There are also some issues relating to
definitions and concepts used in collection of information at present There is
need to develop survey guidelines keeping in view international standards The
survey of minor irrigation projects should be introduced Strategic
action/activity: () Develop survey guidelines and conduct survey on irrigation
Output 11 Survey on Land Use conducted There is  need to adopt latest land use
classification in land use surveys specially keeping in view the emerging
demands from SDGs for sustainable development and measurement 25 Therefore, the
Land Use classification presently in use should be revisited in the context of
latest guidelines and adopted Strategic action/activity: () Revisit land use
classifications and compile land use statistics Output 12 Survey on forest
product conducted There are many forest products and its economic value which
may not be available in other surveys Specialized type of survey is needed to be
conducted for this Strategic action/activity: () Conduct survey on forest
products Output 13 New databases to measure Natural Resources (land, Water and
Air) changes developed There is increasing concern towards natural resource
management, degradation of natural resources and its effect on climate change
Sustainable Development Goals have placed special emphasis on sustainability of
such development processes which do not adversely affect natural resources There
are sporadic data collection on the issues relating to Soil degradation,
pollution in water especially due to agricultural practices adopted or fishery
activities undertaken and emission in the environment specially emission due to
agriculture There is  need to develop guidelines for collection of regular
information on each of the parameters to be identified after detailed
deliberations keeping in view the context of the country and international
standards The parameters have to be representative of various provinces, Zila
and Upazilas so that action points may be identified There would be requirement
for interaction with the officers of the concerned Ministries/ Departments and
also outside experts International expertise may also be required for the
purpose Strategic action/activity: () Conduct survey on soil degradation, water
pollution, air pollution and emission in the environment due to agriculture
Strategic Goal : Develop  comprehensive human resources and capacity building
mechanism with corresponding organizational setup The capability of
Ministries/Departments dealing in agriculture related subjects is to be
strengthened in producing useful and reliable statistics It is also necessary to
promote statistics friendly attitude amongst the staff dealing various subjects
in these Ministries There is  need to develop  comprehensive human resource
development plan for ARS system The human 26 resource plan will be based on
engaging adequate work force having statistics background in BBS and
Ministries/Departments to establish sound statistical system in the country
Outputs under the goal: () Qualified personnel in BBS and other
ministries/departments having statistics background available Statistical cell
in planning wing of different ministries/departments established (ii) (iii)
Training facility created with faculty of agriculture statistics (iv) () (vi)
(vii) Remote Sensing Data Analysis Unit in Agriculture Wing of BBS created
Training of personnel involved in Agriculture Statistics provided Agriculture
wing, BBS reorganized Price data system of DAM strengthened Output  Qualified
personnel in BBS and other ministries/departments having statistics background
available Recruiting sufficient number of statistics graduates in BBS is the
prime step In each ministry and department, statisticians should be recruited to
prepare data base through systematic use of administrative data/records For
this, each ministries/department will have to create posts of statisticians in
their own organizational set-up They will work in coordination of BBS and will
be able to formulate their administrative data in  systematic way This will help
in preparing data bases of their own and increase the use of statistics
Strategic actions/activities: () (ii) Increase the number of statistics graduate
in recruiting statistics officer in BBS Advocate the necessity of creating the
post of statistics officer in planning wing of all ministries/agencies Output
Statistical cell in planning wing of different ministries/departments
established  Statistical cell will be required to establish in the Planning Wing
of each Ministry to assist in planning and plan formulation Statistical officers
from BCS (Statistical) cadre under the administrative control of Statistics and
Informatics Division, Ministry of Planning can be appointed in these positions
These officers will work in ARS related Ministries to coordinate with BBS and
other Ministries/Departments They will also help in developing data bases by
extracting the information from the administrative records according to the
principles and methodologies recommended by BBS This will create congenial
working environment for effective use of administrative data for decision making
It will also help in meeting evolving demand of statistics in different
Ministries/Departments in  cost effective and timely manner, and would ensure
harmonization of concepts and definitions across different ARS producers
Strategic actions/activities: () Setting up of statistical cells in each
ministry and reorganization of Agriculture Statistics Wing of BBS Placing the
issue to competent authority and execute (ii) 27 Output  Training facility
created with agriculture statisticians in the faculty  Statistical Training
Academy aligned with BBS under SID is required to be established to ensure that
all personnel working in the area of statistics are regularly trained and remain
abreast with the latest developments  faculty of agriculture statistics will be
needed with sufficient number of members They will develop course curriculum for
short and long term training on agriculture statistics They will also involve in
research activities with agriculture, fisheries and livestock census data and
contribute policy planning for the sector Reputed national and international
experts can be invited for lecturing on agriculture statistics The training
Academy will be required to work in coordination with other related organization
like Agriculture University, ISRT etc The area of cooperation will be in
designing of course curriculum, providing experts for training, establishing
long term training courses etc This can be done through signing MoU with these
organizations Strategic actions/activities: () (ii) (iii) Establish coordination
between Statistics Training Academy and Agriculture Establishing Statistics
Training Academy Creation of Faculty of Agriculture Statistics in Training
Academy with research cell University and ISRT Output  Training of personnel
involved in Agriculture Statistics provided Proper development of Agriculture
and rural statistics would be possible only if the personnel engaged in the
collection; compilation and analysis of the data are kept updated with the
latest developments in the field The training academy will conduct sufficient
number of quality training course for BBS officials and relevant officials of
other Ministries and Departments It has to formulate short/long term training
course on agriculture and rural statistics, specific training programmes for
crop, fisheries, livestock and other sort of census and surveys Faculty in this
training facility should have trainers in the field of agriculture statistics
Significant activities need be taken to ensure that more trained ARS personnel
are available in NSS Strategic actions/activities: () (ii) (iii) (iv) () Keep
provision for training on agricultural statistics in the NSS training plan
Prepare training plans and update every year Prepare training course, modules
and curricula Implement training plans Strengthen capacity to produce
agriculture statisticians Apart from training in Bangladesh, there would be need
for regular updating the personnel through participation in international
training, workshop and conferences 28 Output  Agriculture Wing in BBS
reorganized There is increasing activity in horticulture, livestock and fishery
sector in the country BBS in its agriculture wing is not in  position to
adequately focus in generation of statistics in these sectors Statistics
generated from the concerned Ministries is also at times not timely and not in
accordance with fundamental principles of official statistics To address the
weakness effectively, it is felt that the present agriculture wing may be
divided in two wings: () Agriculture Statistics (Crops and Land use) Wing, and
(ii) Agriculture Statistics (Fisheries, Livestock & Others) Wing Agriculture
Statistics (Crops and land use) Wing will handle only crops and land use
statistics which will include crop production, horticulture and vegetable crops
including spices etc Agriculture Statistics (Fisheries, Livestock and Others)
Wing will handle statistics relating to livestock, fisheries, forestry and
others Strategic actions/activities: () Review of strength of staff in
agriculture wing of BBS in the context of added responsibility to produce core
statistics recommended by FAO Identification of shortages with specific nature
of jobs (ii) (iii) Creation of two wings- Crop and Fisheries, Livestock,
Forestry & others (iv) Approval for creation of posts () Filling of posts Output
Agriculture Price Data System of DAM Strengthened Considering the necessity of
strengthening the agriculture price information system is very important to
strengthen Department of Agricultural Marketing (DAM) to improve price data
collection System of Agricultural Produces Existing staff in DAM is not adequate
for collecting price information to capture price volatility at Upazila level
Strengthening is required for supporting and protecting farmers’ interest as
well as sustainable agricultural development Strategic actions/activities: ()
(ii) (iii) Conduct ad-hock survey by DAM for collecting price data Expand the
organizational structure of Department of Agriculture Marketing (DAM) Improve
data collection methodology by DAM with support of BBS Output  Remote Sensing
Data Analysis Unit in Agriculture Wing of BBS created  unit of Spatial Data
Analysis under proposed Agriculture Economics Statistics (Crops) Wing will be
required for improvement of crop area and land use statistics The unit will also
use satellite data in conjunction with data on meteorology, soil condition,
temperature etc Adequate number of experts will be required for the purpose 29
Strategic actions/activities: () Creation of remote sensing unit in proposed
Agriculture Economics Statistics (Crops and land use) Wing (ii) Generate RS
based crop statistics  Strategic Goal : Improve ICT infrastructure, develop ICT
applications for collection, compilation and processing, and establish
Integrated Data Management and dissemination system for ARS Conduct of surveys
on agriculture related subjects is primary activity for generation of ARS Survey
work is carried out by BBS and Agriculture related Ministries / Departments
throughout the year Availability of reliable and timely data is possible only
through the use of ICT Therefore, there is  need to develop required
infrastructure in BBS and other data collecting organization like DoF, DAM both
in the field and headquarter Personal Data Assistant / tablets/ laptops need be
used for collection of data from the field The data should be transferred from
the field using telecommunication network and should be processed and compiled
at the headquarter of these Ministries For BBS, agriculture data may be
processed and compiled in agriculture wing with the help of ICT trained
personnel This will facilitate quick dissemination and timely use of data Using
the ICT would result in minimization of cost and time, and also substantial
reduction in non-sampling errors Outputs under the goal: () (ii) (iii) Meta data
on each AR statistics product available (iv) Visibility of AR statistical
product in public domain improved () (vi) Statistical products generated using
ICT tools Infrastructure for using GIS and Remote sensing techniques developed
Data sharing protocols developed Integrated data dissemination platform
established Output  Statistical products generated using ICT tools There has
been increasing use of ICT tools in collection, compilation processing and
dissemination of statistics This capability should be further strengthened There
are number of ICT tools available for Data Collection CAPI of the World Bank is
one tool There are many similar products available in the market There is  need
to assess this tool and suitably adopt in data collection process These tools
may also be required to be customised to meet the requirement of  particular
survey Internet based systems may have to be developed to transfer the data from
the field to  server after due validation Such system will have to be introduced
for each of the survey undertaken by BBS and the Ministries/ Department dealing
in agriculture and rural statistics Strategic action/activity: () Use of GIS/
Remote Sensing and other ICT applications for collection of agriculture related
statistics 30 Output  Infrastructure for using GIS and Remote Sensing data
developed GIS and Remote Sensing technology is currently used for generating
land use information It is commonly used for estimating crop area and for
estimating crop yield even The RS technology is useful for production
forecasting and crop monitoring In Bangladesh SPARSO is generating area coverage
for boro and aman crop However, the information for other crops is not available
due to pre-occupation of SPARSO with its own mandate Further the Geographic
information need be further analysed with data from meteorology and related
departments It is therefore necessary that an inter-disciplinary crop
forecasting mechanism is to be developed in coordination of agriculture wing of
BBS BBS needs  set-up of RS for providing crop coverage as this activity is
prominent in agriculture statistics Strategic actions/activities: () (ii) (iii)
Develop integrated data management system Develop required infrastructure Human
capacity building for use of GIS and Remote sensing Output  Meta data on each AR
statistical product available Proper documentation of metadata needs to be
preserved in all statistical activities incorporating information like () Data
Collecting Agency, (ii) Data Collecting Frequency, (iii) Data Collection
Methodology, (iv) Data Collection Staff, () Sample Size, (vi) Sample Selection
(vii) Frame, (viii) Data Collected, (ix) Data Processing, () Data Dissemination,
(xi) Level of disaggregation, (xii) Timeliness of data release, (xiii) Latest
data available etc Strategic action/activity: () Prepare of meta data of each AR
statistical product Output  Visibility of AR statistical product in public
domain improved  good coordinated system of data sharing and dissemination is
proposed to be established so that the user can easily find the data in  same
web-page getting the links of the relevant data Strategic actions/activities: ()
Improve user participation in AR statistics usage, identification of new data
needs and further action Organize Agriculture and Rural data user’ workshop
Establish  modality to measure user satisfaction (ii) (iii) Output  Data sharing
protocols developed The Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics will need to develop
data sharing protocols with national and international agencies This will create
more visibility of data The scope of deeper analysis and uses of data will be
increased that will further improve planning process 31 Strategic
actions/activities: () (ii) Disseminate data in common management Prepare Rules
and Regulations of data sharing Output  Integrated data dissemination platform
established An integrated approach should be followed in dissemination of
agricultural and rural statistics where BBS and all the relevant Ministries/
Department would participate This would require  coordinated arrangement on
behalf of the Government where BBS will play central role  national Data
Repository on ARS shall be established in BBS ARS data would be accessible to
the users and stakeholders through the website of BBS which will provide
linkages with the websites of other relevant Ministries The arrangement of such
sharing will be developed by signing of MOU between BBS and other Ministries
Strategic action/activity: () Create central data hub with BBS’ coordination
Detailed Strategic goal-wise outputs, strategic actions/activities and
objectively verifiable indicators are presented in the Logical Framework
Document at Annex-IV 32 CHAPTER : IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING & EVALUATION,
FINANCING AND ADVOCACY  Implementation of SPARS  Strategic plan on ARS is
document for future activities for meeting the national and international demand
for data confirming to the global standard The future activities must be
executed through institutional process and the institutional responsibilities
shall be distributed to implement the projected activities in  timely manner The
plan will help to implement the programme effectively and efficiently The
activities and Objectively Verifiable Indicators have been listed in Logical
Framework for each implementing institutions for achieving the strategic goals
of SPARS The ARS will meet the requirement for policy makers, development
organizations and measure through implementation plan and appropriately
execution of plan indicators of specific sectors the performance  SPARS will be
implemented by the Government of Bangladesh through BBS being the focal
organization and all the agriculture related Ministries/ Departments
Responsibility for implementation on each of the activities identified in
Logical Framework will have to be assigned to each agency under the guidance of
Coordination and Monitoring Committee Apart from technical issues, this
committee will also ensure that adequate resources, both financial and human,
are provided for implementation The Committee may setup sub-committees or
technical working groups keeping in view the need for an activity and kind of
guidance / assistance required The Committee will review on the progress of work
done and provide guidelines for implementation  Monitoring & Evaluation  There
should be  monitoring strategy for SPARS It is expected that BBS as the
custodian of SPARS should keep track of the implementation of SPARS activities
with support from other line ministries The Objectively Verifiable Indicators
listed in the Logical Framework for SPARS should be used for monitoring purposes
Apart from half yearly review of the progress, Mid-term review of the progress
may be done by the coordination and monitoring committee so that any course
correction, if required, may be done  As the SPARS is designed to improve the
agriculture and rural statistics, it will require to establish the follow-up
process for proper implementation of SPARS For this,  national committee headed
by Secretary, Statistics and Informatics Division is recommended to form where
Director General, BBS may act as Co-chair of the committee The committee will
include the main stakeholders of agriculture and rural statistics The committee
will evaluate the progress of implementation of SPARS for monitoring and provide
guidelines to BBS for achieving the SPARS goals 33  Financing  Immediate
External Resource requirement  At present the external resource requirement has
been identified on two items: Agricultural Census and setting up of crop
forecasting centre Details are given below:  Agricultural Census 2018 At this
stage most important priority for the Government is to conduct an Integrated
Agriculture (Crop, Livestock, Fishery and Forestry) Census planned for The
project document is yet to be approved with  proposed budget BDT 50 million This
activity is the basis of establishment of Integrated National Survey Calendar
based upon Sampling Frames Keeping in view the technical support to other
similar Censuses, it is expected that there will be  need for about USD 75 to
million This assistance would be required on items like Census Planning (USD 150
thousand), Conduct of Census (USD 100 thousand), trainings and study tours (USD
50 thousand), IT hardware and software (USD 100 thousand), tabulation and
dissemination (USD 200 thousand), Establishments of sampling frames (USD 100
thousand) and Data archiving, fine tuning survey calendar and preparing
appropriate sampling designs etc  Financing through Five Year Plans The main
thrust of BBS work in the next three years will be conduct of Agricultural
Census which is  major national undertaking  clearer picture of partnerships and
Work Plan will emerge during/after the census, particularly on fish and
livestock sub-sectors The implementation of SPARS will be reviewed sometimes in
2019, and revised SPARS would have more precise work plan of activities At that
stage it will also be possible to estimate the resource requirements more
precisely as scope of many statistical activities would have been clarified by
that time It is also expected that SPARS will be fully integrated in the Eighth
Five Year Plan The planning for the eighth plan () will begin in Based on
clearer picture at that time, line ministries may also propose for funding SPARS
activities through their national budget  Advocacy  It is expected that the
SPARS document will be endorsed through due government process involving all the
stakeholders After this is accepted as  government document, consultative
sessions will be organized with development partners to elicit their interest in
supporting any of the identified activities 34 References Bangladesh Bureau of
Statistics, 2012, National Strategy for Development of Statistics (NSDS)
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2016, Setting Priorities for Data Support to
the 7th FYP and SDGs: An Overview Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2016,
Statistical Pocketbook Bangladesh 2015, Ministry of Planning Bangladesh,
Government of, 2014, Report on In-Depth Capacity Assessment of Bangladesh to
produce agricultural and rural statistics FAO & ESCAP & ADB Asia-Pacific
Regional Action Plan to Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics FAO, Bangkok
FAO & United Nations & World Bank Action Plan of the Global Strategy to Improve
Agricultural and Rural Statistics FAO, Rome FAO 2013a Framework for Assessing
Country Capacity to Produce Agricultural and Rural Statistics, Development
Series 1a Rome FAO 2013b Framework for Assessing Country Capacity to Produce
Agricultural and Rural Statistics, Development Series 1b Unpublished FAO
FAOSTAT: FAO’ online database (available at faostat3faoorg) Government of
Bangladesh, Ministry of Finance, 2016, Bangladesh Economic Review PARIS Guide to
Drafting  Roadmap for Designing the National Strategy for Development of
Statistics OECD, Paris PARIS National Strategies for the Development of
Statistics: Some Issues in Design and Implementation Planning; Document Series
No  OECD, Paris World Bank, FAO & United Nations Global Strategy to Improve
Agricultural and Rural Statistics, Report No 56719-GLB World Bank, Washington,
DC 35 ANNEX-: LIST OF MINISTRIES/ORGANIZATIONS ALIGNED WITH ARS SL No Ministries
/Departments Statistics generated by MoP, SID, BBS Relevant Core Data Items
Statistics and Informatics Division Rural Urban Demographics, Household Income
Expenditure & Consumption Status, Rural-urban Migration MoP, SID, BBS Bangladesh
Bureau of Statistics Rural Urban Demographics, Household Income Expenditure &
Consumption Status, Rural-urban Migration 02 BBS, DAE, MoA, DAM, BADC, MoFood,
LGD Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) Land Use and soil, Area and Yield of Crops
(irrigated and variety), Input Cost of Crop Production, Irrigation, Pesticide,
Insecticide, Fertilizer, Agriculture Labour Wage, Food Storage/ Stock, Price of
Agriculture Products, Seed, Feed, Wastage, Food Balance Sheet, Employment
Generation / Gender, Agriculture Land Ownership, Agriculture Credit, Food
Processing, Value Chain, Food Consumption and Nutrition Department of
Agricultural Extension Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation Ministry
of Food Food Planning and Monitoring Unit Space Research and Remote Sensing
Organization Data Needs for Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), Food Safety, and
Sustainable Agriculture Department of Agricultural Marketing Ministry of Finance
Budget for Agriculture Sector MoF Ministry of Fisheries and Fish and Aquaculture
Production, Input Cost of Fish Production, Inputs and Instruments, Agro-
processing and Value Chain, Prices, Employment Generation DoF, BBS Livestock
Department of Fisheries Department of Livestock Services Livestock and Poultry
Production, Age- BBS, DLS specific Population of key Livestock and Poultry, Feed
and Fodder, Livestock Resources Survey, Input Cost of Livestock and Poultry
Production, Processing and Value Chain, Prices, Employment Generation Bangladesh
Bank Export-import Data of Agricultural Products BB, BBS Ministry of Water
Resources Water Used for Irrigation, MoWR, 36 SL No Ministries /Departments
Statistics generated by BWDB Relevant Core Data Items Bangladesh Water
Development Board (natural/mechanized) Ministry of Environment and Forestry Soil
Degradation, Water Pollution, Air Pollution, Emission MoEF, SRDI Department of
Environment Bangladesh Forest Department Forest Area, Forest Produce (Main /
minor), Employment Generation BFD Bangladesh Meteorological Department Average
rainfall, average temperature, sunlight statistics, flood, cyclones BMD Ministry
of Local Government, Rural Development and Co- Operatives Rural infrastructure,
Road Communication in Rural Areas, Rural Electrification, Rural Credit, Railway
Communication, ICT Infrastructure MoLGRD, LGED, BRDB, BREB, BKB, PKSF, BR, BBS
Ministry of ICT ICT Division Local Government Division Local Government
Engineering Department Bangladesh Rural Development Board (BRDB) Bangladesh
Rural Electrification Board (BREB) Bangladesh Railway Bangladesh Krishi Bank
Polly Karmo Shahayak Foundation 37 ANNEX-II: INTEGRATED CENSUS AND SURVEY
CALENDAR Integrated Census and Survey Calendar Frequency Name of Census/Survey
CORE ARS CENSUS AND SURVEYS Status A1 Decadal Integrated Agriculture Census
including supplementary Modules on Crops, Livestock, Fisheries etc On-going A2
CROPS A2 Survey on Area and Yield ( Major and 120 Minor Crops) Annual On-going
A2 Survey on Forecasting of Crop Production Annual On-going A2 Survey on Summer
Vegetable Crops Annual On-going A2 Survey on Winter Vegetable Crops Annual On-
going A2 Survey on Fruit Crops Annual On-going Survey on Pulse Crops Survey on
Farm Machinery Survey on Quantity of Private Food Grain Stock Survey on
Agricultural Labour Wage A2 A2 A2 A2 A210 Cost of Production and Input Use
Survey on Important Crops Annual Ad-hoc Ad-hoc Monthly Annually for selected
crops On-going Proposed Proposed On-going On-going A3 LIVESTOCK Specific Surveys
on Livestock Products (Meat, Milk, Eggs etc) A3 Annual Proposed A3 Cost of
Production and Input use for Livestock Products Annual Proposed A3 Livestock
Resources Survey Half decadal Proposed A4 FISHERIES A4 A4 Fisheries Resources
Surveys Fisheries Frame Survey (Instruments and Means of production) Decadal
Quarterly Proposed Proposed A4 Survey on Cost of Production and Inputs in
Aquaculture Annual Proposed A4 Fish Production Surveys (Culture and Capture)
Annual On-going A5 ENVIRONMENT, FORESTRY & NATURAL RESOURCES A5 National
Socioeconomic Surveys on Forestry Ad-hoc Proposed A5 National Forest Inventory
(Reserve and Social) Ad-hoc Proposed A5 Supply and Demand of Forest Products Ad-
hoc Proposed A5 Social Forestry Survey Ad-hoc Proposed A5 Non-timber Forest
Products (Wood, Honey etc) Ad-hoc Proposed A5 Fuel wood Consumption Survey Ad-
hoc Proposed A5 Forest Based Industries and Machineries Ad-hoc Proposed 38
Integrated Census and Survey Calendar Name of Census/Survey  CORE ARS CENSUS AND
SURVEYS Frequency Status A5 Afforestation and Deforestation Ad-hoc Proposed A5
Survey on Natural Resources (Including Soil Degradation, Water Pollution,
Mineral Extraction etc) Proposed Ad-hoc A6 AGRICULTURE MARKETING Survey on Farm-
gate and Market Prices of Agriculture Produce Survey on Supply and Value Chain
of Private Stock of Food Grains A6 A6 Annual Ad-hoc Proposed On-going A7 RURAL
ACTIVITIES Survey on Agro Processing Activities Survey on Small and Cottage
Industries A7 A7 A7 Rural Infrastructure and Community Survey (along with Half
decadal Half decadal Decadal Proposed Proposed Proposed Agriculture Census)
OTHER CENSUS AND SURVEYS CONTRIBUTING TO ARS B1 Census Contributing to ARS
Population and Housing Census Economic Census B1 B1 B1 Marginalized Community
Census Decadal Decadal Ad-hoc On-going On-going On-going B2 Survey Contributing
to ARS and Official Statistics from Other Sources Inter-censal Survey on
Demographic and Social Indicator B2 Annual On-going B2 Household Income and
Expenditure Survey (HIES) Regular Interval Annual Quarterly Once in  Years Ad-
hoc Ad-hoc On-going B2 B2 B2 Literacy Assessment Survey Labour Force Survey
Survey on Food Security and Nutrition, Disability and Morbidity Time Use Survey
Survey on Seed, Feed and Wastage (For Food Balance Sheet) On-going On-going
Proposed B2 B2 Proposed Proposed Survey on Whole sale and Retail Trade Survey of
Manufacturing Industries B2 B2 B210 Land Use Survey B211 Rural Credit Survey
B212 Statistics on Government Expenditure for Agriculture and Rural Half decadal
Half decadal Annual Ad-hoc Annual Proposed Proposed Proposed On-going Proposed
Development (Including Agricultural Subsidy) B213 Statistics on Rural Roads,
Highways, Railway, Rural Ad-hoc Proposed Electrification, Storages Facilities of
Agricultural Produces B214 Irrigation Statistics for Crop Cultivation
(Mechanized, Non- mechanized, Surface water and Underground Water) Ad-hoc
Proposed B215 Fertilizer Statistics (Coverage Type, Quantity, Price, Organic,
Ad-hoc Proposed Inorganic etc) B216 Statistics on Use of Pesticides,
Insecticides etc B217 Statistics on Seeds Ad-hoc Ad-hoc Proposed Proposed 39
ANNEX-III: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Implementing Agency/
Ministry Means of Verification/ Source of data Objectively Verifiable Indicators
Target Year Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities)
Strategic Goal : Improve competencies of National Statistical System to produce
and disseminate core set of ARS in accordance with international standards and
best practices Competencies of NSS Strengthened Output  Activity  Produce and
disseminate reliable and timely agriculture statistics Use up-to-date
methodologies in surveys and censuses Reliable and timely Reports published Up-
to-date methodologies are used 2018 and onward 2018 and onward BBS, SID BBS, SID
Annual report (AR) DAE, DoF, DLS Concerned organizations Availability of
resources Activity  Continuation of review process Activity  Provide guidance to
other organizations producing statistics 2017 and onward 2017 and onward 2017
and onward Optimum coordination among ministries/agencies achieved BBS performs
its job in efficient and effective manner Continue consultation with
stakeholders DAE, DoF, DLS, DAM (AR) BBS is to be capable in providing technical
guidance Reorganization of BBS & adequate training needed Continued data demand
assessment needed BBS SID Activity  Improve professionalism of BBS personnel BBS
SID BBS Activity  Meet the demand of stakeholders properly Output  Enhanced use
of official statistics in planning /decision making process Involve
statisticians in medium/long term planning document of the country Ensure
enhanced use of official statistics in administrative management Activity
Inclusion of statisticians in preparing policy document 2018 and onward BBS GED
GED Coordination between BBS and GED needed Activity  2018 and onward All
ministries and agencies All ministries and agencies (AR) Government support in
evidence based decision making needed Related government circular issued,
evidence based decision making process established 40 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL
FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data
Implementing Agency/ Ministry BBS and concerned ministries/ agencies Objectively
Verifiable Indicators Target Year Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic
Actions (Activities) Optimum cooperation between BBS and concerned
ministries/agencies needed Activity  Enhance involvement of statisticians in
preparing sector-specific plan Statisticians assigned in sector specific plan
2018 and onward Concerned ministries/agencies (AR) Output  All ARS products
follow international standards and quality Activity  Review the concepts,
definitions adopted in collection of ARS in BBS and aligned ministries/agencies
Follow the principles of official statistics set by UNSD Review report on each
ARS product  BBS BBS and concerned departments Cooperation among
ministries/agencies needed All ministries/agencies need to be acquainted with UN
principles Government approval needed Activity  Principles of statistics are
followed 2018 and onward BBS SID Activity  Review statistical process adopted in
producing ARS Review report on each process for ARS product  BBS BBS Activity
Assess quality of ARS produced and suggest methods for improvement 2017 BBS BBS
SID (AR) Assessment report on the quality of ARS product along with suggested
methodology BBS initiative is essential Output  National Quality Assurance
Framework (NQAF) for ARS Developed Identify international standards and
guidelines for each ARS product Activity  Report on each ARS product followed
standards 2017 Concerned ministries & BBS BBS Concerned ministries and BBS BBS
initiative is essential Activity  Evaluation of existing process for generation
of the product in the context of international guidelines Assessment report on
each ARS product 2017 BBS BBS initiative is essential 41 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL
FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data
Implementing Agency/ Ministry Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target Year
Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities) Output  Core-
set of indicators available according to GSARS Evaluate existing data
availability to GSARS Activity  Check list of available data prepared 2018 BBS
SID BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant agencies BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM,
BFD Other relevant agencies (AR) Continuous effort of BBS & approval of SID
needed Activity  Identify data gap to GSARS List of new data item prepared 2018
BBS SID Continuous effort of BBS is needed BBS Activity  Conduct new survey and
taking proper steps to transform administrative records into official statistics
Reports available 2018 and onward BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant
agencies Availability of government approval, resource Output  Updated
methodologies/best practices followed by other countries adopted Adopt updated
methodologies/best practices followed by other countries BBS Activity  Updated
methodologies/ best practices 2018 And onward BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM, BFD Other
relevant agencies (AR) Availability of government approval BBS 2018 And onward
BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant agencies (AR) Policy decision of SID
needed Activity  Review and improve existing methodology used by BBS in regular
interval Continue evaluation process for improving methodology 42 ANNEX-III:
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data
Implementing Agency/ Ministry BBS Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target Year
Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities) Activity
Organize/participate in national/international seminars on methodological issues
Greater number of BBS officials participated 2018 And onward BBS, DAE, DoF DLS,
DAM, BFD Other relevant agencies (AR) Support of government and UN agencies
needed BBS Activity  Involve academia/ experts in designing and implementing
census/surveys Academia/experts involved in BBS activities 2018 And onward BBS,
DAE, DoF DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant agencies (AR) BBS needs to take necessary
measures Strategic Goal : Strengthen partnership and coordination among
Ministries / Departments and attain harmonized definitions and statistical
practices to efficiently produce coherent ARS Output  Efficient production of
coherent and consistent agriculture and rural statistics Development of
integrated calendar for census and surveys for ARS Activity  Integrated
census/survey calendar prepared and published Manual updated and required
training organized 2017 BBS and other relevant agencies BBS, DAE, DoF, DLS, DAM
BBS and other relevant agencies BBS needs to take necessary steps Activity
Organize regular training with updated manual for field staff 2017 and onward
BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM (AR) Resources availability Output  Improved coordination
between BBS and other data producing agencies of ARS Setting up coordinating
body under the Statistics Act,2013 on all matters relating to Agriculture and
Rural Statistics Activity  2017 BBS Approval of SID is needed Form coordinating
body with clear terms of reference and membership 43 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL
FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data
Implementing Agency/ Ministry BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant
agencies Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target Year Assumptions and risks
Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities) Activity  Establish partnership with
ministries/ departments and delegation of responsibility relating to production
and release of ARS to each concerned ministry/ department Establish coordination
through MoU for defining responsibilities MoU signed with relevant
ministries/agencies 2018 and onwards BBS SID Good coordination among
ministries/agencies needed Activity  ToR of different partner agencies prepared
and shared 2018 and onward BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM,BFD Other relevant agencies
BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant agencies BBS SID Good coordination
among ministries/agencies needed Initiatives of concerned ministries/agencies
needed Activity 2018 and onward  Appoint focal point official of line
ministry/department to BBS for coordination Focal Point Official appointed BBS
SID Output  Harmonized concepts and definitions used by all ministries/agencies
of ARS Activity  Prepare compendium of standard concepts and definitions on ARS
Compendium prepared and published 2017- 2018 BBS BBS and related departments
BBS’ initiative needed Activity  Update concepts and definitions in accordance
with the recommendations of international agencies Review concepts and
definitions regularly 2017 and onward BBS SID BBS and related departments BBS’
initiative needed Activity  Conduct review meeting with stakeholder Meeting
conducted with stakeholders 2018 and onward 2017 and onward BBS, SID and other
concerned ministries/ agencies Approval of SID needed Output  More
administrative data used as official statistics 44 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data Implementing
Agency/ Ministry BBS, SID, DAE, DoF, DLS,BFD DAM, Other agencies Objectively
Verifiable Indicators Target Year Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic
Actions (Activities) Activity  Develop new statistical products from
administrative system of agriculture related ministries Methodology developed
for the new product and put in practice 2017 and onward MoA, DAE, MoFL, DoF,
DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant agencies Policy support of government needed
Activity  Collaborate line ministries/agencies to preserve administrative
records systematically Issue government circular for preserving administrative
records 2017 and onward BBS, DAE, DoF DLS, DAM, DF Other relevant agencies MoA,
DAE, MoFL, DoF, DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant agencies(AR) Policy support of
government needed Output  Increased participation of stakeholders for assessing
data demand Conduct ad-hock survey on data demand Activity  Ad-hock survey
conducted and findings disseminated 2017 and onward BBS SID MoA, DAE, MoFL, DoF,
DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant agencies MoA, DAE, MoFL, DoF, DLS, DAM, BFD Other
relevant agencies Others MoA, DAE, MoFL, DoF, DLS, DAM, BFD Other relevant
agencies Government approval needed Activity  Organize consultation
meeting/workshop on use of agricultural and rural statistics Consultation
meeting/workshop organized 2017 and onward BBS SID Support of government and
international agencies needed Activity  Assess SDG indicators/other relevant
policy documents and determine data gap Report on assessment of SDG and other
documents published 2016 and onward BBS SID Government effort needed Strategic
Goal : Strengthen capacity to adopt cost effective and scientific survey
methodology using sampling frame based on Censuses 45 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL
FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data
Implementing Agency/ Ministry Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target Year
Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities) Output
Structural data on crops, livestock and fisheries are available generated from
related censuses Conduct Agricultural Census covering crops, fisheries and
livestock sub- sectors Sampling Frames using census data base for annual survey
on production of crop, fisheries and livestock developed Develop Sampling Frames
to meet requirement of crop, livestock, fishery and forestry surveys Activity
Agriculture Census results disseminated  BBS SID BBS, SID, MoA MoFL, DAE DOF,
DLS Government approval and resource needed Output  Activity  Survey carried out
annually and results disseminated 2018 and onward BBS, SID DOF BBS, SID, MoA
MoFL, DAE DoF, DLS (AR) Government approval and resource needed Activity
Establishing  Census/Survey Methodology Wing in BBS Census and Survey Calendar
related to ARS followed Methodology Wing established 2019 and onward BBS SID
Better coordination among agencies needed Output  Activity  Conduct
census/survey following the calendar Develop methodology and generate data on
good agricultural practices Annual Crop production survey conducted using
improved methodology Design and prepare sampling frame and conduct annual crop
production Census/ survey conducted as per Calendar Agriculture census reports,
Administrative report 2017 and onward  BBS, DoF BFD, DAM BBS, DAE, DoF and DLS
DAE DLS DAE, DoF and DLS Government approval and resource needed Resources are
available Activity  Output  Activity  Sampling frame prepared and annual crop
production survey conducted 2018 and onward BBS SID DAE SPARRSO Availability of
resources 46 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of
Verification/ Source of data Implementing Agency/ Ministry Objectively
Verifiable Indicators Target Year Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic
Actions (Activities) survey Output  Annual fish production survey conducted
using improved methodology Design and prepare sampling frame and conduct annual
fish production survey (inland) Generate annual production of marine fish Annual
livestock production survey conducted using improved methodology Design
integrated sampling frame for livestock and conduct annual survey Annual survey
on input cost of Crops, fisheries and livestock and their value chains conducted
using improved methodology Design and conduct annual input cost survey for major
cereals and other crops Activity  Sampling frame prepared and annual fish
production survey conducted Annual marine fish production data generated 2018
and onward BBS, DoF SID MoFL DoF MoFL Availability of resources Activity  2018
and onward Availability of resources Output  Activity  Survey carried out
annually and results disseminated 2018 and onward BBS DLS Availability of
resources Output  Activity  Survey carried out annually and results disseminated
Survey carried out once in  year and results disseminated Survey carried out
once in  year and results disseminated Survey carried out once in  year and
results disseminated 2019 and onward 2019 and onward BBS SID DoF MoFL BBS BBS
MoA Availability of resources Activity  Design and conduct input cost survey for
production of fish on regular interval Design and conduct input cost survey for
livestock production on regular interval Design and conduct survey on supply
chain and value chain of crops, fisheries and livestock production Availability
of resources Activity  2019 and onward DLS MoFL (AR) Availability of resources
Activity  2019 and onward BBS DAM (AR) Availability of resources 47 ANNEX-III:
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data
Implementing Agency/ Ministry BBS, DLS Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target
Year Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities) Activity
Conduct Livestock Resources Survey Survey carried out once in  year and results
disseminated 2019 and onward DLS Availability of resources Output  Annual Food
Balance Sheet (FBS) prepared Activity  Prepare Food Balance Sheet (FBS) annually
Food Balance Sheet published 2017 and onward BBS DoF, BB, EPB, FAO others
Availability of resources Output  Survey on private food grain stock (supply and
value chains) conducted Conduct annual/ad-hock survey on Private Stock of Food
Grain survey on supply and value chain Survey of irrigation system conducted
Activity  Survey on private stock of food grain supply and value chain conducted
2017 BBS FPMU MoF DAM (AR) Availability of resources 2019 Output 10 Activity
Develop survey guidelines and conduct survey on irrigation Survey conducted on
Irrigation/administrative data compiled 2017 and onward BBS DAE (AR) Resources
are available Output 11 Survey on land use conducted Survey conducted on land
use/ Administrative data compiled Activity Revisit the land use classifications
and compile land use statistics 2018 and onward BBS DLR (AR) Continuous effort
of BBS needed Output 12 Survey on forest product conducted Activity Conduct
survey on forest products Carry out survey on inventory of forests once in ten
years 2018 and onward BFD BBS Resources are available Output 13 New databases to
measure Natural Resources (Land, Water and Air) 48 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data Implementing
Agency/ Ministry Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target Year Assumptions and
risks Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities) changes developed Activity
Conduct survey on soil degradation, water pollution, air pollution and emission
in the environment due to agriculture Related survey conducted and data released
2018 and onward SRDI, MOA DoE, MOEF MODMR Resources are available Strategic Goal
: Develop  comprehensive human resources and capacity building mechanism with
corresponding organizational setup Qualified personnel in BBS and other
ministries/departments having statistics background available Output  Activity
Increase the number of statistics graduate in recruiting statistics officer in
BBS Advocate the necessity of creating the post of statistics officer in
planning wing of all ministries/agencies More statistics graduates recruited as
statistics officer/statistician Advocacy meeting organized and communication
continues BBS, SID MOP, MOPA MOF BBS, SID MOPA, All other ministries agencies
Government approval and resources needed 2018 and onward Activity  2018 and
onward Government approval needed Output  Statistical cells in each
ministries/department related with ARS established Activity  Setting up of
statistical cells in each ministries and reorganization of agriculture
statistics wing in BBS Statistics cells created with necessary trained
personnel; Agriculture Wing of BBS reorganized 2018 and onward Concerned
Ministries BBS, SID MOPA Government approval needed 49 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL
FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data
Implementing Agency/ Ministry BBS SID Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target
Year Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities) Activity
Placing the issue to competent authority and execute Recommendation placed to
competent authority 2018 and onward Continuous effort of BBS and SID needed
Output  Training facility created with agriculture statistics in the faculty
Establishing Statistics Training Academy Activity  Statistics Training Academy
established 2018 and onward BBS, SID MOP, MOF BAU ISRT Government approval and
resources needed Activity  Creation of Faculty of Agriculture Statistics in
Training Academy with research cell Establish coordination between Statistics
Training Academy and Agriculture University and ISRT Training to the personnel
involved in agriculture statistics provided Keep provision for training on
agriculture statistics in the training plan Faculty of Agriculture statistics
created in Training Academy MoU signed between BBS and Agriculture University
and ISRT BAU ISRT Government approval and resources needed 2018 and onward BBS,
SID, MOP MOF Activity  2018 to 2020 BBS, BAU ISRT, SID Government approval
needed Output  Activity  Training plan on agriculture statistics prepared 2018
and onward BBS SID BBS SID BBS, SID ISRT Availability of resources Activity
Prepare training plan and update every year Training plan updated 2018 and
onward Continuous effort of BBS needed Activity  Prepare training course module
and curricula Training modules prepared 2018 and onward Continuous effort of BBS
needed ISRT Activity  Implement training plans Necessary training conducted
Refreshers training organized for field staff 2018 and onward 2017 and onward
BBS, SID DOF BBS SID Availability of resources  Strengthen capacity to produce
agriculture statistics Statistics Wing under BBS Reorganized Availability of
resources DAE, DOF DLS Activity Output  50 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR
BANGLADESH SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data Implementing Agency/
Ministry BBS SID MoP Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target Year Assumptions
and risks Outputs and Strategic Actions (Activities) Activity  Review of
strength of staff in agriculture wing of BBS in the context of ARS Number of
existing staff of BBS increased  Continuous effort of BBS needed Activity
Identification of shortages with specific nature of jobs Number of specialized /
expert personnel  BBS BBS Continuous effort of BBS needed Activity  Two wings
created: Agriculture Statistics (Crops and land use) Wing and Agriculture
Statistics (Fisheries, Livestock and Others) Wing New posts created and approved
BBS, SID MoPA, MOP MOF Government approval needed Creation of two wings in BBS
for agricultural statistics Activity  Approval for creation of posts  BBS, SID,
MOP MoPA, MOF Government approval needed Activity  Filling of posts Recruitment
process completed  BBS, SID MOP, MOPA Government approval needed Output
Agriculture Price data system of DAM strengthened Activity  Reorganization of
DAM completed  DAM, MoA MOPA Government approval needed Expand the
organizational structure of DAM Activity  Improved methodology developed and
used DAM BBS Good coordination needed Improve data collection methodology with
support of BBS 2017 and onward Activity  Conduct ad-hock survey by DAM for price
data collection Necessary survey conducted and data disseminated 2017 and onward
DAM BBS Resources are available 51 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH
SPARS () Means of Verification/ Source of data Implementing Agency/ Ministry
Objectively Verifiable Indicators Target Year Assumptions and risks Outputs and
Strategic Actions (Activities) Output  Spatial data analysis unit in Agriculture
Wing of BBS created Activity  Creation of remote sensing unit in proposed
Agriculture Economics (Crops and land use) Wing Remote Sensing Unit created in
Agriculture Wing of BBS  BBS SID Government approval needed Activity  Area
statistics on the basis of RS technique generated  BBS SID Government approval
needed Generate RS based crop statistics for prominent crops Strategic Goal :
Improve ICT infrastructure and its applications for collection, compilation and
dissemination of ARS and establish Integrated Data Management and dissemination
system Output  Statistical products generated using ICT tools Activity  Use of
GIS / Remote Sensing and other ICT applications for collection of agriculture
related statistics Data collected and compiled using ICT and GIS technology  BBS
DAE SPARRSO Availability of resources Output  Infrastructure for handling GIS
and Remote Sensing data developed Activity  Develop required infrastructure
Hardware and software for GIS and Remote sensing procured and installed Training
provided to the personnel deployed for the purpose Established data collection
and processing facility using ICT for timely dissemination BBS SID SPARRSO
Availability of resources Activity  Human capacity building for use of GIS and
Remote sensing  BBS DAE SPARRSO Activity  Develop integrated data management
system  BBS SID DAE, DAM, BMD, SPARRSO, FPMU, MoA Government approval and
resources needed 52 ANNEX-III: LOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR BANGLADESH SPARS () Means
of Verification/ Source of data Implementing Agency/ Ministry Objectively
Verifiable Indicators Target Year Assumptions and risks Outputs and Strategic
Actions (Activities) Output  Meta data on each AR statistical product available
Prepare of meta data of each AR statistical product Assign responsibility of
Meta data Management to each agency based on the activity involved DAE, DOF, DLS
DAM, LGED Other relevant ministries/agencies Activity  2017 and onward BBS SID
Government approval and resources needed  Visibility of AR statistical product
in public domain improved Improve user participation in AR statistics usage,
identification of new data needs and further action Output DAE, DOF, DLS DAM,
LGED Other relevant ministries/agencies DAE, DOF, DLS DAM, LGED Other relevant
ministries/agencies Concerned ministries and departments Activity  Data
dissemination mechanism improves, data demand assessed 2017 and onward BBS SID
Continuous effort of BBS needed Activity  Organise of Agriculture and Rural data
users’ workshops Number of workshops organized 2017 and onward BBS SID
Availability of resources Activity  Establish  modality to measure user
satisfaction Well organized feedback forum formed 2018 and onward BBS SID
Continuous effort of BBS needed Output Activity   Data sharing protocols
developed Disseminate data in common management Signing MoU among data producers
2017 and onward BBS SID Government policies and initiative needed Activity
Prepare Rules and regulations of data sharing Rules and regulations finalized
and circulated 2017 and onward BBS SID Government approval needed Output
Integrated data dissemination platform established Create central data hub with
BBS’ coordination Assess data demand and arrange to supply as continuous process
Government approval, good coordination and resources needed Activity  2017 and
onward BBS SID Concerned ministries/agencies 53