 Sustainable & Renewable Energy Development Authority Power Division Ministry of
Power, Energy, & Mineral Resources Government of the Peoples Republic of
Bangladesh Scaling Up Renewable Energy in Low Income Countries (SREP) Investment
Plan for Bangladesh October 2015 Government of the People’ Republic of
Bangladesh Sustainable and Renewable Development Authority (SREDA) Power
Division Ministry of Power, Energy & Mineral Resources  Ref No:  Date: 11
Subject: Submission of SREP IP for Bangladesh  am pleased to submit the
Investment Plan (IP) of Bangladesh’ Scaling-Up Renewable Energy Program (SREP)
to the SREP Sub-Committee for endorsement The SREP in Investment Plan
collaboration and consultation with representatives from Government,
particularly with the Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority
(SREDA), private industries, academia and with the expertise and support of our
development partners, the World Bank Group and Asian Development Bank for
Bangladesh has developed The Government of Bangladesh is committed to the
development of  stable and sustainable power supply that will increase
electricity access, enhance energy security, reduce poverty and mitigate climate
change The Government recognizes the important role that renewable energy can
play in achieving these goals The Government has set  goal of total
electrification by 2020, and has called for the development of domestic
renewable energy resources to ensure that the share of domestic energy supply
would remain over 50 percent Renewable energy resources will ensure  stable and
universal power supply that will reduce poverty by sustainable socio-economic
growth Though Bangladesh has  negligible carbon footprint, but remains one of
the most vulnerable nations in the world for the effect of climate change, and
we recognize the important role that renewable energy can play in reducing
associated risks This Investment Plan identifies the renewable energy
technologies and projects that can be best contributed to the Government’ energy
and economic goals It outlines the activities that must be carried out to
develop technologies that have enormous potential to integrate renewable energy
into the grid, and to expand our successful off-grid electrification programs
SREP will support the Government in reaching its goals for the energy sector,
and help leverage private sector funds to expand investment in domestic
renewable energy resources substantially Government of Bangladesh looks forward
to the support of SREP for this Investment Plan (IP) and to work with our
development partners to successfully implement the projects and programs
identified herein Table of Contents  Investment Plan Summary   Context   The
Context for SREP Involvement   Renewable Energy in Bangladesh   The Proposed
Investment Program for Bangladesh   Country Context   Economy   Poverty   Energy
Supply and Demand   Policies and Plans 10  Legal, Regulatory and Institutional
Framework 15  Access to Electricity 24  Electricity Supply and Demand 25
Electricity Tariffs 28  Sector Challenges 33  Renewable Energy Sector Context 35
Assessment of Electricity Generating RE Technologies 36  Assessment of Other RE
Technologies 47  Cost of RE Technologies 49  Barriers to RE 55  Role of Private
Sector 59  Investments by Development Partners 64 Prioritization of Renewable
Energy Technologies  69 Program Description  77  Grid-Connected Renewable Energy
77  Off-grid Solar PV 81  Waste to Energy Advisory Support 82  Program
Implementation Arrangements 83  Environmental, Social and Gender-Related Co-
Benefits 84  Environmental and Social Risks 86 Financing Plan and Instruments
88 Responsiveness to SREP Criteria  94  Implementation Potential with Risk
Assessment 98  Monitoring and Evaluation 102 Appendices Appendix  : Assessment
of Bangladesh’ Absorptive Capacity 104 Appendix  : Project Concept Briefs 108
Appendix  : Stakeholder Consultations 120 Appendix  : Co-Benefits 125 Appendix
: Comments from Independent Technical Reviewer 126 Appendix  : Preparation Grant
and MDB Payment Requests 132 Appendix Tables Appendix Table : Comparison of
Financial Intermediaries 107 Appendix Table : Proposed Financing Plan for Grid-
Connected Renewables Project 111 Appendix Table : Proposed Financing Plan for
Off-Grid Solar PV 116 Appendix Table : Proposed Schedule 117 Appendix Table :
Proposed Financing Plan for Waste to Energy 119 Appendix Table : Stakeholders
Contacted during Inception Phase 121 Appendix Table : Attendees of Stakeholder
Meeting 122 Appendix Table : Co-Benefits Associated with SREP Impacts and
Outcomes 123 Appendix Table : Attendees of Private Sector Stakeholder Meeting
124 Appendix Table : Co-Benefits Associated with SREP Impacts and Outcomes 125
Appendix Table : Technical Review Response Matrix 126 Appendix Table : SREP
Project Preparation Grant Request (Grid- Connected Renewables) 132 Appendix
Table : MDB Request for Payment for Project Implementation Services (Grid-
Connected Renewables) 134 Appendix Table : SREP Project Preparation Grant
Request (Off-Grid Solar PV) 135 Appendix Table : MDB Request for Payment for
Project Implementation Services (Off-Grid Solar PV: Mini-Grids) 137 Appendix
Table : MDB Request for Payment for Project Implementation Services (Off-Grid
Solar PV: Solar Irrigation) 138 Appendix Figures Appendix Figure : IMF Debt to
GDP Projections,  104 Appendix Figure : Composition of Public Debt () 105
Appendix Figure : Public External Debt by Funding Source (2013) 105 Appendix
Figure : External Debt Service Payments () 105 Tables Table : Financing
Plan—Phase   Table : Policy Framework for the Energy Sector 11 Table : 2010
Power Sector Master Plan Targets 12 Table : New Solar Park and Wind Farm
Capacity (in MW) by Implementation Model 15 Table : Key Information about
Transmission Grid System 18 Table : Key Information on Distribution Companies in
Bangladesh 19 Table : Roles and Responsibilities of Energy Sector Entities 20
Table : Legal Framework for the Power Sector 23 Table : Regulatory Framework for
the Power Sector 24 Table : Summary Renewable Energy Technical Potential 37
Table : Solar Parks Technical Potential 39 Table : Capacity Factors for Rooftop
Solar and Solar Home Systems 41 Table : Allocation of SHS Units in Technical
Potential 41 Table : Wind Farms Technical Potential 43 Table : Biomass Technical
Potential 43 Table : Biogas Technical Potential 45 Table : Economic and
Financial Viability Assumptions 50 Table : Cost Assumptions for Grid-Connected
RE Technologies 50 Table 10: Cost Assumptions for Off-Grid RE Technologies 53
Table 11: Barriers to Renewable Energy Development and Mitigation Options 57
Table 12: RE Projects Financed under the Refinancing Scheme for RE in 2014 59
Table 13: Achievements of the IDCOL SHS and Domestic Biogas Programs 60 Table
14: IDCOL Financing by RE Technology 63 Table 15: Number of Domestic and
International Vendors of Solar Products (2014) 63 Table 16: Proposed and
Completed Biogas Projects 64 Table 17: Development Partner and Donor Supported
Projects and Technical Assistance 66 Table : Ranking of Renewable Technologies
against Selection Criteria 72 Table : Financing Plan—Phase  90 Table : Financing
Plan—Phase  93 Table : Summary of Projects’ Responsiveness to SREP Criteria 94
Table : Risk Assessment of the SREP Programme in Bangladesh 99 Table : Results
Framework for the SREP Programme in Bangladesh 102 Figures Figure :
Administrative Divisions of Bangladesh  Figure : Annual Change in Real GDP and
Inflation,   Figure : Poverty Rates in South Asia (at US$ 25 per day PPP)
Figure : Primary Energy Consumption,  10 Figure : Residential Energy
Consumption,  10 Figure : RE Development Targets,  14 Figure : 500 MW Solar
Program Installation Goals (MW) 15 Figure : Energy Policy and Regulatory
Entities 16 Figure : Energy Utility Companies in Bangladesh 17 Figure 10:
Installed Capacity by Owner, 2015 17 Figure 11: Access to Electricity, 2015 25
Figure 12: Change in Access to Electricity,  25 Figure 13: Monthly Electricity
Generation Mix,  26 Figure 14: Installed Grid-Connected Capacity by Fuel Type,
2015 27 Figure 15: Peak Demand by Month and Average Demand by Hour, 2014 27
Figure 16: Maximum Load Shed by Month,  28 Figure 17: Projected Supply-Demand
Balance,  28 Figure 18: Average Residential Tariff by Monthly Consumption, 2010-
2015 31 Figure 19: 2015 BPDB Tariffs vs Delivery Cost, FY2013-2014 32 Figure 20:
Operating Net Profit (Loss) in FY  33 Figure 21: Percentage of Urban and Rural
Households with Electricity by Division, 2010 34 Figure : Installed RE Capacity
by Type (2015) 36 Figure : Solar Park Resource Maps 38 Figure : Wind Park
Resource Potential Maps 42 Figure : Commercial Farming Animal Waste Resource
Maps 44 Figure : RE Supply Curves for Grid-Connected Electricity (Economic
Viability) 51 Figure : RE Supply Curves for Grid-Connected Electricity
(Financial Viability) 52 Figure : RE Supply Curves for Off-Grid Electricity
(Economic Viability) 54 Figure : RE Supply Curves for Off-Grid Electricity
(Financial Viability) 54 Figure : SHS Program by IDCOL 60 Figure : Procedure for
Obtaining Environmental Clearance Certificates 99 Boxes Box : Public Procurement
Rules in Bangladesh 30 Box : Climate Change and Bangladesh 35 Box : Rooftop
Availability Studies 40 Box : Financing of IDCOL Projects 61 Box : Gujarat
Rooftop Solar Program 80 Box : The Maldives Rooftop Solar Program 80 Box :
Current Business Models for Solar Irrigation and Minigrids 82  This document
contains the Investment Plan (IP) for Bangladesh The IP is the result of
extensive analysis by the Sustainable & Renewable Energy Development Authority
(SREDA), and  wide-reaching internal and public consultation process, also led
by SREDA, to identify priorities in the development of renewable energy
technologies for electricity generation The consultations included  wide range
of government agencies, as well as representatives from the private sector,
civil society, and academia Investment Plan Summary The Investment Plan, if
implemented, will be transformational for Bangladesh, launching an aggressive
drive toward the integration of renewable energy generation into the grid, and
continued expansion of the off-grid electrification programs with which
Bangladesh has had so much success in the past  Context Bangladesh is  low lying
country located on the Ganges Delta Seventy-five percent of the country is less
than 10 meters above sea level and more than 700 rivers run through its borders
Approximately 144 million people live in  total area of 147,500 square
kilometers, giving it the highest population density in the world among large
countries, and twelfth highest overall (976 people per km2) About 23 percent of
the population is urban, with the remaining 77 percent living in rural areas
Poverty in Bangladesh is widespread, but on the decline In 2015, about 25
percent of the population lived below the national poverty line, down from 32
percent in 2010 and 49 percent in Despite this considerable improvement,
Bangladesh still has substantially higher poverty rates (in terms of purchasing
power parity, or PPP) than other countries in the South Asia region Bangladesh
had  poverty rate of percent in 2010 (in terms of purchasing power parity, or
PPP), while the regional average was just percent The incidence of poverty in
Bangladesh is highest in the Rangpur and Barisal administrative divisions and
northern Dhaka Nationwide, 74 percent of the population has access to
electricity (up from only about 20 percent in 1990) Electrification rates are
highest in urban areas, where only about one percent lack access to electricity
In rural areas, 34 percent do not have electricity Electrification rates have
improved in recent years because of rapid acceleration of grid connection to
rural areas, coupled with the installation of solar home systems— since 2003,
about  million solar home systems have been installed, benefiting about 20
million people The majority of electricity is supplied through gas-powered
thermal generation Rental power producers (RPPs) using diesel generators have
been contracted to meet peak demand in the summer Electricity has also been
imported from India since September In terms of renewable energy (RE),
hydropower is the primary grid-connected RE source  Power Division, Bangladesh
Power Sector: An Overview, September  The energy sector in Bangladesh faces
important challenges which include, among others, limited availability of
indigenous hydrocarbon resources, limited access to the electricity network, and
climate change Government has been trying to mitigate these challenges by
undertaking plans and programs to ensure supply of electricity according to
demand and to maintain  steady GDP growth rate of over six percent for the next
few years The Power System Master Plan 2010 set goals for fuel diversification
with an emphasis on increasing the role of renewable energy in the power
generation mix The Context for SREP Involvement Access to Electricity The
primary challenge in the Bangladesh energy sector is to provide universal
electricity access by 2021, in line with Government targets The lack of service
has economic consequences for some of the poorest regions in the country
According to the 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey, Barisal and
Rangpur divisions— the divisions with the highest incidence of poverty—have the
lowest percentage of rural households with access to electricity, at 32 and 24
percent, respectively, though these electrification rates are improving
substantially In 2010, Rangpur division also had the lowest urban
electrification rate, at just 69 percent, compared to the 2010 national rate of
88 percent Energy Security Bangladesh faces challenges in the form of natural
gas depletion and biomass availability It has been estimated that Bangladesh’
natural gas reserves will begin to deplete in 2020 if no new gas reserves are
discovered or if technology does not allow  higher rate of extraction from
existing gas fields The uncertainty about reserves has limited the development
of gas-based power generation programs Biomass is becoming scarcer and more
expensive, which negatively impacts poor households that rely on this fuel
source More than 90 percent of Bangladesh households use traditional biomass for
cooking, and biomass accounts for 50 percent of Bangladesh’ total energy supply
The common fuels used are rice husks, jute sticks, cow dung and wood Declining
indigenous resources and increasing demand has caused Bangladesh to increasingly
depend on imported fuel oil The increase in fuel oil consumption has been driven
by increased reliance on fuel oil for power generation to mitigate energy
shortages From 2009 to 2015, the share of oil-fired electricity has increased
from  to 20 percent This increase in oil-fired electricity contributed to the
fuel cost per kWh generated going from  to 42 taka/kWh (US$ 014 to US$ 04) over
the same period This leaves Bangladesh’ energy sector vulnerable to political
and economic instability in nations from which it imports fuel, as well as
rising prices generally Climate Change Bangladesh is one of the world’ most
vulnerable countries to climate change, despite its negligible carbon footprint
As  low-lying country with many rivers, Bangladesh has  very high flood risk,
both due to monsoons and sea-level rise associated with  PGCB Monthly
Operational Reports  climate change Rising temperatures have already begun to
shorten the life cycle of rice; reducing yields Low crop production could
increase poverty up to 15 percent by Higher water levels could lead to higher
incidence of waterborne disease, such as cholera, and result in forced migration
due to flooding The World Bank has noted that Bangladesh is particularly
vulnerable to an increase in poverty headcount rate and risk of chronic poverty
as  result of different warming scenarios Climate change could also reduce the
availability of clean water supply and sanitation The World Risk Report ranks
Bangladesh as the fifth most vulnerable country in the world to climate change
In addition, the Climate Change Vulnerability Index rates Dhaka as one of the
five most climate-vulnerable cities in the world Bangladesh addresses climate
change issues through the Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan,
which is implemented through the donor-funded Bangladesh Climate Change
Resilience Fund  Renewable Energy in Bangladesh Bangladesh has considerable
renewable energy potential, and significant past experience in developing
renewable energy projects Most of the existing RE investment has been in off-
grid technologies such as solar home systems (SHS), solar microgrids, and solar
irrigation pumps The GoB has set several investment targets for grid-connected
technologies including utility-scale solar, wind, and waste-to-energy Despite
significant potential the development of these grid-connected renewable energy
technologies, however, has been slow to materialize There are  number of
regulatory, financial and technical barriers that, if addressed, could
accelerate renewable energy investment in Bangladesh Improved regulations, such
as establishment of  formal feed-in tariff and provisions for compensating
minigrid investors after transmission expansion, would reduce risk and send
strong signals to investors Grant funding and low interest financing can help
address concerns about affordability for both grid-connected and off-grid
projects Reduced financing costs can also offset the high cost of procuring land
for projects, land scarcity being one of the key barriers to investment Overall
the paradox of the investment situation is that increased experience with
renewable energy projects will lead to increased investment Successful renewable
projects will provide better access to data on renewable energy; demonstrate
successful business models that can be replicated by local banks; and allow
local workers the opportunity to learn the necessary technical skills The GoB
has two sets of directives for renewable energy investment The first is the 500
MW Solar Program, developed in The objective of the program is to add 500  IPCC,
2014, Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability Part :
Regional Aspects Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Barros, ,  Field,  Dokken,
Mastrandrea,  Malch,  Bilir,  Chatterjee,  Ebi,  Estrada,  Genova,  Girma,
Kissel,  Levy,  MacCracken,  Mastrandrea, and  White (eds)] Cambridge University
Press, New York  World Bank, “Turn Down the Heat: Confronting the New Climate
Normal,” Alliance Development Works, “WorldRiskReport ”  MW of solar generation
capacity by 2016 through financing and implementing solar- powered projects in
both the public and private sectors The GoB has also set renewable energy
development targets for several technologies for each year from 2015 to 2021
(“RE Development Targets”) The RE Development Targets call for an additional
,100 MW of RE capacity to be installed by Most of the new capacity will be
provided by solar (,676 MW, or 54 percent) and wind (,370 MW, or 44 percent)
There are also targets for waste-to-energy (40 MW), biomass ( MW), biogas ( MW)
and hydro ( MW) SREP could play  major role in addressing some of the investment
barriers and support the GoB’ renewable energy goals SREP funds would be used to
kick-start investment in the government priority areas of utility-scale projects
and off-grid solar Grants and low cost financing can be used to attract early
investors into an unproven market and keep the cost of energy more affordable
for customers The successful projects developed using SREP funds will then
demonstrate the potential for scaling up projects and attract other investors
into the market  Each of the potential renewable energy resources were evaluated
against national and SREP criteria, and prioritized accordingly The criteria
reflect the Government’ strategic objectives, and the clear recognition that
SREP funding should be used to overcome barriers to technologies that will have
the potential to have  transformative impact on the energy sector The criteria
considered included: scalability (the amount of developable resource potential
relative to other technologies), availability of sites, unexploited market
potential, readiness for implementation and financial viability The Proposed
Investment Program for Bangladesh The prioritization exercise has led to the
selection of three areas where Government will request SREP support: ; Grid-
connected renewable energy, which includes  combined 200 MW in utility-scale
solar PV and grid-connected rooftop solar PV If wind resources prove to be
sufficient, and there is private sector interest, the SREP funds could also be
used for  grid-connected wind project ; Off-grid solar PV, which includes  MW in
solar irrigation, and 25 MW in mini/microgrids ; Advisory support in preparing
municipal waste-to-energy project Table  presents  plan for financing the
projects described in Section  It shows the proposed credits and grants from
SREP as well as estimates of the amounts anticipated from MDBs and the private
sector As the table shows, roughly US$ 75 million of SREP funding is expected to
catalyse over eight times as much investment, most of it from the private sector
(as equity or debt), and the public sector lending windows of the MDBs The exact
financing modalities will be determined at the time of appraisal, but it is
expected that: ; Roughly US$45 million of SREP funding would be used to leverage
US$100 million in IDA financing from the World Bank, US$100 million in   partial
risk guarantee (PRG) or similar instrument if needed, $30m of IFC investment,
and US$190 million in investment from other private sector investors for
utility-scale renewable energy plants (primarily solar but possibly also wind),
and rooftop solar IFC’ assistance would also be sought for additional technical
assistance on possible business models or transaction advisory on structuring of
the PPP arrangement under which private operators would be selected ; Roughly
US$95 million of SREP grant funding would be used to leverage US$140 million in
concessional financing from ADB for solar irrigation and hybrid minigrid
projects ; The World Bank would provide support for an assessment of technical
and commercial feasibility of  municipal waste-to-energy project The Government
of Bangladesh will contribute by facilitating fiscal incentives for services
associated with the financing plan  Table : Financing Plan—Phase  MDB Respon-
sible Government of Bangladesh Private Sector (Equity or Debt) SREP Project SREP
MDBs Total Grid-Connected Renewables Investment in utility-scale solar and wind,
and rooftop solar Investment in utility-scale solar and wind, and rooftop solar
Resource assessment Technical assistance or transaction advisory Subtotal: Grid-
connected renewables Off-grid solar PV Investment in mini-grids Investment in
solar irrigation Project preparation Subtotal: Off-grid solar PV Development
support for Waste-to-Energy Assessment of technical and commercial feasibility
for WtE plant Subtotal: Development support for Waste-to-Energy Investment Plan
Preparation Grant Grand Total SREP Leverage (Million US$) 00* 00 WB IFC WB IFC
00 00 95 50 45 20 25 00 00 20 25 95 50 90 45 00 (Million US$) 00 00 00 00 00 95
95 75 60 75 60 95 30 ADB 35 00 (Million US$) 00 30 30 30 00 30 30 30 80 WB 00 00
00 80 00 00  Notes: All amounts in this table are preliminary estimates and are
subject to availability of funds *Roughly $100 million of this amount could be
IDA financing and $100 million could be in the form of  PRG or similar guarantee
instrument The guarantee instrument will be used only if required by private
sector bidders  The investments associated with the SREP investment prospectus
represent the first phase of  two-phase investment program planned by Government
Support for Phase II will be sought from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) The second
phase will include  continuation of the grid-connected renewable energy projects
and the waste-to-energy project launched as part of Phase  (with SREP
assistance) as well as support for scaling up existing clean cookstoves programs
Bangladesh is  low lying country located on the Ganges Delta Seventy-five
percent of the country is less than 10 meters above sea level and more than 700
rivers run through its borders The Chittagong Hill Tracts, Low Hills of Sylhet
and the highlands in Rangpur are the highest points of elevation Bangladesh has
more than 580 km of coastline, and 32 islands in the Bay of Bengal and Padma
River Country Context According to the 2011 census, approximately 144 million
people live in  total area of 147,500 km2, giving it the highest population
density in the world among large countries, and twelfth highest overall (976
people per km2) Roughly 23 percent of the population is urban, with the
remaining 77 percent living in rural areas The largest cities are Dhaka, the
capital (03 million), and Chittagong (59 million) Population density of the
administrative divisions ranges from  low of 630 people per km2 in Barisal
Division to  high of ,521 people per km2 in Dhaka Division Figure  below shows
the administrative divisions of Bangladesh, along with relevant population
statistics Figure : Administrative Divisions of Bangladesh Division Population
(Millions) Pop Density (per km2) 630 Urban Pop % Rural Pop % Barisal 325 % %
Chittagong 423 838 % % Dhaka 424 ,521 % % Khulna 687 704 % % Rajshahi 484 ,018 %
% Rangpur 787 975 % % Sylhet 910 784 % % Total 043 976 % % Source: 2011 Census,
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics  Bangladesh is classified as  developing economy
by the IMF Its economic growth has averaged nearly six percent per year since
Bangladesh’ GDP was US$ billion in Fiscal Year , with manufacturing (17
percent), motor vehicles (13 percent), service (13 percent), and agriculture (12
percent) being the largest value- Economy  added sectors The economy lost about
US$  billion (about  percent of GDP) as  result of political unrest in 2013 and
January 2015, but economic growth in Bangladesh has largely been resistant to
political instability, natural disasters, poor infrastructure and global shocks
Bangladesh was less affected by the global financial crisis because of increased
international demand for low-cost exports, and remittance growth of percent in
2008-Figure  below shows the actual and projected annual change in real GDP and
annual inflation from 2000 to Inflation in Bangladesh has been constrained by
reduced global oil prices and conservative monetary policies Figure : Annual
Change in Real GDP and Inflation,  Source: IMF World Economic Outlook (April
2015) The economy added  million jobs per year from 2010 to The national
unemployment rate is five percent, but underemployment rates are much higher
Important employment sectors include agriculture (54 percent); trade, hotel and
restaurant (16 percent); and manufacturing (12 percent) About 86 percent of
employment is informal  Poverty Poverty in Bangladesh is widespread, but on the
decline In 2015, about 25 percent of the population lived below the national
poverty line, down from 32 percent in 2010 and 49 percent in 10 Despite this
considerable improvement, Bangladesh still has scope to reduce poverty rates
Figure  shows poverty rates in South Asia in terms of purchasing power parity,
or PPP, where the poor are defined as those who earn less than US$ 25 per day
PPP The horizontal line represents the 2011 regional average of percent Using
this indicator, Bangladesh had  poverty rate of percent in The incidence of
poverty in Bangladesh is highest in the Rangpur and Barisal administrative
divisions and northern Dhaka  Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (2015)  World
Bank, Bangladesh Development Update, April World Bank, “Impact of the Global
Financial Crisis in South Asia’ Electric Power Infrastructure”  BBS Labour
Survey, 10 General Economics Division of Bangladesh, Millennium Development
Goals Bangladesh Progress Report, Figure : Poverty Rates in South Asia (at US$
25 per day PPP) Note: Country data is from 2010 for Bangladesh, Nepal and
Pakistan; 2011 for India; and 2012 for Bhutan No data was available for
Afghanistan or Maldives The only data available for Sri Lanka was from 2002, so
it was excluded Source: World Bank Development Indicators  Indigenous fossil
fuel supply in Bangladesh is comprised of natural gas, coal and oil products
There are 21 natural gas fields in Bangladesh, operated by three national and
two international companies 11 There are five coalfields in Bangladesh, in
Barapukuria, Khalaspir, Jamalganj, Fulbari and Dighipara12 In 2012, Bangladesh
struck its first oil in two fields in Sylhet 13 In 2013, Bangladesh produced
21,000 ktoe of natural gas (up from 18,000 ktoe in 2010), 400 ktoe of coal and
200 ktoe of oil14 Energy Supply and Demand Natural gas and biofuels are the main
sources of energy in Bangladesh Primary energy consumption increased 74 percent
from 2000 to 2012, with natural gas and coal consumption growing at the fastest
rates (see Figure ) 1111  12  13  14 United States Energy Information
Association  Figure : Primary Energy Consumption,  Source: IEA Energy Balances
(2014) Biofuels remain the main source of energy for residential consumers;
however consumption patterns have changed in recent years Biofuels as
percentage of total residential consumption decreased from 81 to 70 percent
between 2000 and Electricity increased from five to ten percent of consumption,
and natural gas increased from seven to 16 percent of consumption, replacing the
consumption of biofuels (see Figure ) Figure : Residential Energy Consumption,
Source: IEA Energy Balances (2014)  Policies and Plans The following sub-
sections provide  summary of important characteristics of the national and
international policy frameworks of Bangladesh’ energy sector, as well as
Government plans for RE development  Strategic Objectives of the Government of
Bangladesh Table  provides an overview of GoB’ policy objectives for the energy
sector 10 Table : Policy Framework for the Energy Sector Policies Overview ;
Plan to attract private sector investments in the energy Private Sector Power
Generation Policy (1996) sector to meet energy sector growth targets ; Strive to
have energy meet the needs of economic growth in Bangladesh, and meet the needs
of all the zones and socio-economic groups ; Optimum development of indigenous
energy sources ; Promote sustainable utility operations ; Rational use of energy
sources and environmentally National Energy Policy (1996) friendly development
of renewable energy ; Promote public and private participation in the sector,
and develop  regional energy market to ensure energy security ; Goal of total
electrification by 2020 ; Ensure reliable and affordable energy supply ;
Established procedures to identify Private Infrastructure Projects ; Set
guidelines for private sector investors and the GoB for the procurement and
implementation of Private Infrastructure Projects Private Sector Infrastructure
Guidelines (2004) ; Set guidelines for monitoring and expediting the
implementation of Private Infrastructure Projects ; Plan to lessen the gap
between supply and demand for energy by utilizing the surplus capacity of CPPs
and allowing electric utilities to purchase electricity from CPPs Policy
Guidelines for Power Purchase from Captive Power Plant (CPP) (2007) ; Guidelines
for the implementation of the RAPSS Remote Area Power Supply System (RAPSS)
Guidelines (2007) program, in which private investors are given an area (either
on-grid or off-grid) to develop an electricity generation and distribution
system, which they then utilize as  utility operator for up to 20 years ;
Guidelines to allow for fast-track private sector establishment of SPPs for
their own electricity needs, and to sell the surplus to others Policy Guidelines
for Small Power Plants (SPP) (1998, Revised 2008) ; SPPs are to be developed
with  capacity of 10MW or less (larger plants are possible with government
permission), and are to be established on  build-own- operate basis 11 ; Goal of
renewable energy constituting % of total generation by 2015 and 10% by 2020 ;
GoB committed to facilitating public and private sector RE investments ; Scale
up RE contributions to electricity and heat energy, and substitute RE for
indigenous non-renewable energy supplies Renewable Energy Policy of Bangladesh
(2008) ; Facilitate RE use at every level of energy usage ; Develop legal
environment that promotes RE use ; Encourage efficient and environmentally-
friendly use of renewable energy, and promote clean energy ; Goal of promoting
private sector participation, competition, efficient use of natural gas, and the
development and revitalization of power plants through PPPs Policy Guidelines
for Commercial IPP (2008, Amended 2010) ; Established guidelines for
establishing and enhancing PPPs in the power sector ; Goal of enhancing and
improving solar technology, and attracting donor organizations and private
investors ; Established guidelines for implementing solar parks, Guidelines for
the Implementation of Solar Power Development Program (2013) solar minigrids,
solar rooftop systems and solar irrigation pumps  National and International
Policy Frameworks Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) is currently
supporting an update of the 2010 Power Sector Master Plan The 2010 Master Plan
set several plans and corresponding targets, summarized in Table  Table : 2010
Power Sector Master Plan Targets Plan Target ; To actively develop primary
energy ; To maintain domestic primary energy resources supply over 50% –
Domestic natural gas development – Domestic coal development ; To establish the
power system portfolio by fuel diversification ; Fuel composition ration in
2030: 50% coal, 25% natural gas, 25% others – Construction of imported coal
power station – Introduction of LNG facilities – Construction of oil-fired power
station – Import electricity generated by hydropower from neighboring countries
(or joint development) 12 – Development of domestic renewable energy (wind,
solar, biogas, biomass and waste-to-energy) ; To realize  low-carbon society by
; Improve thermal efficiency by 10 points on introducing  high-efficiency power
supply and low CO2 average – High-efficiency gas power station – Development of
domestic coal power station – Review of operations and maintenance schemes –
Energy conservation and demand-side management ; To build an infrastructure
necessary for stable power supply under joint multi-sector coordination ;
Jointly build  deep sea port facility (power, industry, and commercial sectors)
– Construction of deep sea port – Improvement of power transmission system –
Enhancement of gas transmission line – Construction of fuel center – Strengthen
domestic waterways – Strengthen railway system ; To build efficient and
effective mechanisms, organizations and regulations for stable power supply ;
Establish an organization for long-term stable fuel supply security –
Organization for coal procurement ; Formulate regulations for compulsory regular
inspection of power stations ; Revise the tariff structure to recover
maintenance costs and provide for future investment in plants and equipment –
Introduction of Power Development Surcharge into the power tariff – Promotion of
private investment to realize the Master Plan – Create an effective and
efficient power market ; To reduce poverty through socio- ; Promote local
communities and mutual economic growth collaboration – Spread stable and
sustainable power supply – Promote rural area electrification – Promote local
industry, associated employment opportunities and income increases – Promote
mutual collaboration between the power station and the local community 13
Source: Ministry of Power, Energy and Natural Resources and Japan International
Cooperation Agency, Power System Master Plan 2010, February  Government Plans
The GoB has two sets of directives for renewable energy investment The GoB has
set renewable energy development targets for several technologies for each year
from 2015 to 2021 (“RE Development Targets”) The RE Development Targets call for
an additional ,100 MW of RE capacity to be installed by Most of the new capacity
will be provided by solar (,676 MW, or 54 percent) and wind (,370 MW, or 44
percent) There are also targets for biomass (47 MW), biogas ( MW) and
hydroelectricity ( MW) Figure  shows the RE development targets for each
technology from 2015 to Figure : RE Development Targets,  Source: Based on
information provided by SREDA The RE Development Targets propose three models
for investment in utility-scale parks and wind farms: GoB investment on
government owned land; independent power producer (IPP) investment on government
land; and private investment on private land The current plan for procuring the
private sector projects is to hold auctions for IPP investment on government
land and to negotiate fixed tariff for private investment on private land Feed-
in-tariffs are an option that may be considered for these projects but are
currently being considered just for small-scale generation and microgrid
projects Table  shows the targets for new capacity of solar parks and wind farms
(in MW) via each of these implementation models from 2015 to 14 Table : New
Solar Park and Wind Farm Capacity (in MW) by Implementation Model 2015 2016 2017
2018 2019 2020 2021 Total Solar park 68 40 50 30 40 45 273 GoB on government
land Wind farm 100 150 150 100 100 600 Solar park  85 50 50 50 338 50 50 IPP on
government land Wind farm 50 100 100 350 50 50 Solar park 100 100 100 100 600
100 100 Private on private land Wind farm 20 100 100 100 420 50 50 Total  273
440 550 530 390 395 ,581 Source: Based on information provided by SREDA The
second directive is the 500 MW Solar Program, developed in The objective of the
program is to add 500 MW of solar generation capacity by 2016 through financing
and implementing solar-powered projects in both the public and private sectors
The program will help the GoB achieve the goals set out in its Renewable Energy
Policy (2008) for the percentage of electricity to be generated from renewable
sources (five percent by 2015 and 10 percent by 2020) Figure  shows  breakdown
of the installation goals of the program by application Figure : 500 MW Solar
Program Installation Goals (MW)  The following sub-sections provide  summary of
important characteristics of the legal, regulatory, and institutional framework
of Bangladesh’ energy sector Section  provides information on important
institutions in the energy sector, including generation, distribution and
transmission companies and their assets Section  summarizes the legislative and
regulatory framework in the energy sector in Bangladesh Legal, Regulatory and
Institutional Framework 15  Institutional Framework in the Energy Sector There
are several important institutions responsible for energy policy and regulation
in Bangladesh Figure  below shows their responsibilities and the relationships
between the institutions Figure : Energy Policy and Regulatory Entities Adapted
in part from:  and  Figure  shows the energy utility companies in Bangladesh,
including generation, transmission and distribution companies, which are further
described below 16 Figure : Energy Utility Companies in Bangladesh Note:
Although NWZPDCL and SZPDCL are not yet operational, BPDB is still providing
distributional services to customers in the Northwest and Southwest zones Those
distribution duties and assets will later be transferred to the individual
entities Generation The Power Development Board (BPDB) and its affiliates
operate ,803 MW (about 53 percent) of installed capacity Rental power producers
(RPPs) have been contracted on three-, five- and 15-year contracts to address
power shortages Figure 10 below shows installed grid-connected capacity by owner
Figure 10: Installed Capacity by Owner, 2015 Source: PGCB; BPDB SREDA
Transmission The Power Grid Company of Bangladesh (PGCB) owns the national power
grid, the only high voltage power transmission network in Bangladesh Table
summarizes information about the length and capacity of the transmission network
17 Table : Key Information about Transmission Grid System Transmission Lines 400
kV 70 km 230 kV 70 km 132 kV 6120 km Substations 400 kv  (500 MW HVDC, B2B) 230
kv 18 132 kv 86 Performance Metrics Transmission Losses 82% No of grid Failures
(Time)  (14 hours 24 minutes) Source: PGCB Annual Report FY2013-Distribution
There are five distribution companies, operating in separate service areas: ;
BPDB: Urban areas in their six zones—Northern Zone (Rajshahi), Comilla,
Mymensingh, Sylhet, Rangpur and Chittagong BPDB’ distribution responsibilities
will eventually be transferred to NWZPDCL and SWZPDCL ; WZPDCL: West zone—Khulna
Division, Barisal Division and Greater Faridpur, comprising 21 districts and 20
upazilla, excluding REB area ; DPDC: Southern part of Dhaka and Narayanganj ;
DESCO: Dhaka Mega City Area ; REB: Collective of 72 PBSs serving 52,714 villages
in rural areas, with  total of approximately million connections15 15 As of June
Bangladesh Rural Electrification Board,  18 Table  below provides details on the
networks, substations, connections and system losses for each distribution
company 19 Table : Key Information on Distribution Companies in Bangladesh
Distribution Company Network 33 kV Substations System Losses (FY13-14)
Connections (km of lines) BPDB 38,934 153 ,901,235 89% WZPDCL 10,526 63 790,080
98% DPDC ,266 42 925,437 76% REB 277,037 664 11,375,908 72% DESCO ,074 29
641,187 41% Source: Company websites, FY2013-2014 Annual Reports Table  below
summarizes the roles and responsibilities of each entity of Bangladesh’ energy
sector 20 Table : Roles and Responsibilities of Energy Sector Entities Entity
Roles and Responsibilities Ministry of Planning, Industry and Energy Division ;
Coordinate national new and renewable energy projects and coordinate between
ministries for cross-ministry energy projects ; Develop energy sector documents,
such as the Power Energy Sector Road Map (2011), and arranges for public
financing of energy projects Ministry of Finance The Ministry of Power, Energy &
Mineral Resources (MPEMR) ; Consists of the Energy and Mineral Resources
Division and the Power Division ; Policies related to petroleum, natural gas,
mineral resources, and geological surveys ; Administration of Geological Survey
of Bangladesh, Bureau of Mineral Development, Department of Explosives,
Bangladesh Petroleum The Energy & Mineral Resources Division, under MPEMR
Institute, Hydrocarbon Unit, Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Mineral Corporation and
Bangladesh Petroleum Corporation ; Develops all necessary Laws, Rules and
Regulations related to power generation, transmission and distribution ;
Responsible to ensure supply of required electricity in line with economic
growth of the country ; Prepares necessary short-, medium- and long-term plans
and programs to ensure national target of electricity generation and take Power
Division , under MPEMR appropriate steps to implement these ; Coordinates the
activities of the Power Cell, EA & CEI, SREDA, Bangladesh Power Development
Board (BPDB) and Bangladesh Rural Electrification Board (REB) ; Coordinates with
other related stakeholders to ensure uninterrupted supply of primary energy for
power generation ; Develop and implement reform programs that improve the
sector’ performance, increase consumer satisfaction, and maintain sector
viability ; Promote sector development and optimum resource utilization ;
Strategize for corporatization of sector entities, and develop
financial/business plans and HR/ plans ; Develop and implement the MIS & IT
system of the power sector ; Capacity building for system improvement, tariff
calculation, and cash flow studies ; Development of the power sector Master Plan
; Develop  communication system between the utilities Power Cell, under the
Power Division, MPEMR 21 ; ; Grant licenses for high tension and medium tension
consumers, electrical contractors, engineers and electricians ; The Energy
Monitoring Unit ( subdivision of EA & CEI) ensures that industries are using
energy efficiently and energy is being conserved Inspect installations,
substations and lines Office of the Electrical Advisor & Chief Electric
Inspector (EA & CEI), under the Power Division, MPEMR were possible ; Coordinate
between ministries and departments concerned with sustainable and renewable
energy ; Executive members are responsible for duties involving renewable
energy, energy efficiency, finance, administration, policy and research ; Assist
Government to prepare laws, rules, regulations and policies related to RE and EE
; Enforcement of laws, rules and regulations related to EE and standards ; Set
standards for EE appliance and industrial energy uses ; Facilitate enabling
environment for RE and EE project development ; Provide necessary support to
access CDM and similar climate support families for RE and EE projects ; Assist
in the achievement of renewable energy goals, such as the plan to increase
renewable energy’ share of generation to  percent in Sustainable and Renewable
Energy Development Authority (SREDA), under the Power Division, MPEMR 2015 and
10 percent in ; Generation, installed generation capacity of 11,683 MW (as of
September 2015, excluding captive) ; Distribution, mainly in urban areas (except
for Dhaka and the area covered by WZPDC), and also some rural areas not covered
by REB ; ,901,235 consumers (as of the end of the 2014 fiscal year) Bangladesh
Power Development Board (BPDB), under the Power Division, MPEMR ; Electrifying
rural Bangladesh through the management and regulation of electricity
cooperatives or “Palli Bidyut Samity” (PBSs) ; Use electricity to facilitate
socio-economic development and improve agriculture in rural areas ; 12,974,985
consumers served (as of September 2015) Rural Electrification Board (REB), under
the Power Division, MPEMR ; Enforcement of codes, standards and existing laws on
environmental energy standards, and dispute resolution ; Set performance targets
and encourage  competitive market ; Set standards for energy operations and
supply ; Determine tariffs ; ; Develop the methodology for performance rating
for all licensees ; Collect, review, maintain, and publish energy statistics ;
Audit machinery and appliances that utilize energy and determine their
efficiency level The Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission (BERC) Issue
licenses and license exemptions, and approve schemes based on those licenses 22
; Provides private sector energy and infrastructure financing ; Offers
refinancing, grant support, and technical assistance to project sponsors and
Partner Organizations (POs) who implement the Infrastructure Development Company
Limited (IDCOL) programs and projects 23  Legal and Regulatory Framework in the
Power Sector Table  provides an overview of energy sector legislation in
Bangladesh Table : Legal Framework for the Power Sector Laws Overview ; Set
standards for electricity supply, transmission, and distribution ; Stipulates
that the GoB will encourage power generation Electricity Act (1910, Amended
2012) utilizing renewable and non-conventional energy ; Set guidelines for
private sector participation, policy formation, reform, and reorganization ;
Established the Bangladesh Energy Regulatory BERC Act 2003 (Amendments 2005 &
2010) Commission ; Simplified power project approval processes, to allow for
Power and Energy Fast Supply Enhancement (Special Provision) Act (2010)  fast
increase in supply to the national grid ; Established the Sustainable and
Renewable Energy Sustainable & Renewable Energy Development Authority (SREDA)
Act Development Authority, and set its responsibilities and authorities Table
below summarizes important regulations and codes in the power sector in
Bangladesh 24 Table : Regulatory Framework for the Power Sector Regulations and
Codes Overview ; Set regulations for licenses issued by BERC for energy
generation, transmission, distribution and marketing BERC License Regulations
(2006, Amended 2011) ; Sets regulations for generation bulk supply tariffs
(BST), transmission wheeling charges, and retail distribution tariffs BERC
Electricity Generation Tariff Regulations (2008) ; Set regulations for wind and
solar tariff structure and Draft Feed-In Tariff (FIT) Regulations (2015) design
; Set responsibilities of involved entities ; Established rules for safety and
technical standards ; Regulations for investment and operational planning ;
Established commercial operating guidelines Electricity Grid Code (2012) ;
Assigned Distribution Licensees the responsibility of maintaining an efficient
and economical distribution system, and supplying energy in accordance with the
BERC Licensing Regulation and the Distribution Licensee Standards of Performance
Electricity Distribution Code (2012) ; Illustrate the implementing procedure of
SREDA Act on Draft Energy Efficiency & Conservation Rules (2015) energy
efficiency and conservation issue  Access to Electricity Rapid urbanization is
causing demand growth, but supply improvements have not been able to keep pace
The Government has set  target for nationwide electricity access of 90 percent
by Nationwide, 74 percent have access to electricity (as of September 2015), up
from about 20 percent in 16 Most of the urban population has electricity access
(nearly 99 percent) In rural areas, electricity access, including solar home
systems, is 66 percent The Rural Electrification Board (REB) has historically
averaged 90,000 connections per month, but this has increased to nearly 300,000
new connections per month in summer To achieve the 2018 target, this connection
rate has to rise to 450,000 new household connections per month Figure 11 shows
electricity access rates for the urban, rural and total population in Figure 12
presents the change in access to electricity from 1990 to 16 Power Division,
Bangladesh Power Sector: An Overview, September 25 Figure 11: Access to
Electricity, 2015 Source: World Bank Development Indicators; Power Cell Figure
12: Change in Access to Electricity,  Source: World Bank Development Indicators;
Power Cell  Natural gas fueled turbines make up 62 percent of Bangladesh’
installed generation capacity, these plants represented percent of electricity
production in Rental power producers (RPPs) using diesel generators have been
contracted to meet peak demand in the summer Electricity has also been imported
from India since September In terms of renewable energy (RE), hydropower is the
primary grid- connected RE source (see Figure 13) Electricity Supply and Demand
26 Figure 13: Monthly Electricity Generation Mix,  Source: PGCB Monthly Reports
The most common fuel type for generation in Bangladesh is natural gas, which
makes up 62 percent of total-grid connected capacity This is followed by furnace
oil (21 percent) and diesel ( percent) Figure 14 shows the installed grid-
connected capacity by fuel type Installed off-grid capacity includes solar home
systems (150 MW), electricity from biogas and biomass ( MW), wind ( MW) and
rooftop solar PV (14 MW)17 The currently installed rooftop PV installations are
mostly for on-site use and not connected to the grid (an exception is the 50 kWp
solar installation on the Secretariat building) These installations are the
result of the government requirement for  certain percentage of lighting loads
to come from solar for getting  new grid connection In the absence of  clear
regulation and lack of inspection and monitoring, many of these installations
are reported to be put up merely to satisfy the requirements for getting  new
grid connection, and are not up to standards to produce any meaningful energy 27
Figure 14: Installed Grid-Connected Capacity by Fuel Type, 2015 Source: PGCB;
BPDB SREDA Electricity demand peaks in the summer months, at over ,000 MW (see
Figure 15) The system load factor is Daily demand typically peaks between 5PM
and 11PM Figure 15: Peak Demand by Month and Average Demand by Hour, 2014
Source: PGCB New capacity from IPPs and RPPs have improved power supply in
recent times Maximum load shed has declined since May 2012, and total load shed
days has decreased (see Figure 16) Despite the decline in load shed, unserved
energy from transmission failures has increased 61 percent— ,155 MW jump—from
2013 to Unserved energy has continued to rise in the first five months of 2015,
increasing nine percent over the same period in While RPPs have added much-
needed capacity, they do not represent  sustainable long-term solution to energy
shortfalls Their ability to meet energy shortfalls quickly makes them an
attractive option, but not  long-term solution Moreover, RPP costs increase with
the price of imported oil 28 Figure 16: Maximum Load Shed by Month,  Source:
PGCB Monthly Reports Additional capacity investments are needed for supply
reliability to continue to improve Sustained GDP growth of six percent per year
could lead to an increase in annual demand of 62 percent by 2020 and 207 percent
by If power demand continues to grow at the projected rate, an average of 829 MW
per year needs to be installed over the next 15 years to meet peak demand in
2030 (see Figure 17) Figure 17: Projected Supply-Demand Balance,  Source:
DHInfrastructure projections  The approach for setting electricity tariffs was
established in the Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Act (2003) The Act calls for
BERC to set tariffs, tariff policy and methodology in consultation with GoB As
part of this role BERC has established procedures for the following tariffs:
Electricity Tariffs ; BPDB Bulk Supply BERC sets the price BPDB uses to sell
energy to the distribution companies The tariff is supposed to cover the
expenses incurred by BPDB in operating their own power plants and also the cost
of 29 procuring energy from IPPs and RPPs The difference between the cost of
power purchase by BPDB and the bulk supply tariff at which BPDB sells to the
distribution utilities is provided by the Government as direct budgetary
transfer to BPDB18 Procurement and price negotiations between IPPs, RPPs, and
developers of publically-owned power plants must be in line with Public
Procurement Rules (PPR) (2008) Procurement processes under the PPR are
summarized in Box 19 ; PGCB Wheeling Charges Price paid by distribution
companies to PGCB for delivery over the high-voltage transmission network ; End-
User Tariffs BERC also sets tariffs for the distribution companies BERC receives
tariff applications from the distribution companies periodically and performs
due diligence, including conducting open public hearings, before issuing  tariff
order The Power Pricing Framework (2004) established the distribution tariff-
setting methodology According to the Framework, the average end-use tariff for
each customer category20 should cover the costs of supplying power to those
customers, including generation, distribution, transmission and maintenance
costs It should also provide some extra funding for coverage expansion and
quality improvement Any subsidies for consumer types are to be taken directly
from the budget In addition, tariffs should incentivize technological
improvement and efficiency Rates are different for peak and off-peak hours For
BPDB’ generation,  two-part tariff will be introduced—one to cover fixed costs
and the other to cover variable costs 18 In FY2014, this transfer amounted to
about US$ 800 million, compared to US$ 584 million in FY2013 and US$ 840 million
in FY2012 Government has  target to keep the transfer within BDT 60 million (or
about US$ 770 million) for FY2015 19 Exceptions to the PPR are allowed for
certain periods to expedite installation of power plants under the Power and
Energy Fast Supply Enhancement (Special Provision) Act (2010) 20 Customer
categories include domestic, agriculture, small industry, non-residential,
commercial, medium voltage, high voltage, extra high voltage and street lights
and pumps 30 Box : Public Procurement Rules in Bangladesh Bangladesh’ Public
Procurement Rules (2008) provide for several methods of procurement: ; Open
tendering: competition open to all interested firms via public advertisement; ;
Limited tendering: competition limited to those directly invited to tender; ;
Two-stage tendering: open, publicly advertised tendering in which an initial
unpriced technical proposal is submitted and evaluated for compliance and
responsiveness; all responsive tenderers from the first stage are invited to
submit priced tenders; ; Single stage two envelope tendering: similar to two-
stage tendering, but technical and financial proposals are submitted
simultaneously in separate envelopes; ; Request for quotation (RFQ): simplified
tender, advertised on company website, requesting quotations for low-value goods
and services; ; Direct procurement: procuring entity requests  priced offer,
subject to negotiation, from  tenderer directly, without competition, for
proprietary, exclusive or urgently needed goods and services; ; Request for
proposals (RFP): technical and financial proposals used for procurement of
intellectual and professional services, sent to short-listed applicants and
evaluated based on specific experience of the applicants, adequacy of
methodology and work plan proposed, and qualification of key staff Applicants
meeting  minimum technical score are then evaluated on their financial
proposals, and technical and financial scores are combined to select an
Applicant for further negotiations Recent BPDB projects (for their own plants)
have been procured through either open tender or single-stage two envelope
processes IPPs tend to be procured using an RFP under  Build-Own-Operate (BOO)
model IPPs involve three contracts: ()  power purchase agreement (PPA) with BPDB
where BPDB is required to purchase the power produced by the IPP; (ii)  fuel
supply agreement with the fuel supplier guaranteeing uninterrupted fuel supply;
and (iii) an implementation agreement with GoB that backstops BDPB’ payment
commitment and provides fiscal incentives to facilitate the project IPP tenures
range from seven to 22 years RPPs follow  competitive bidding process, but QRPPs
are awarded based on negotiation RPP contracts range from three to 12 years RPPs
operate under  “must dispatch” obligation up to their declared capacity End-user
tariffs vary by customer category Domestic consumers have incremental block
tariffs (IBT) that increase based on kWh increments or “slabs” The lifeline
tariff for residential customers was reduced to 50 kWh per month Figure 18 shows
the average residential tariff by monthly consumption from 2010 to 31 Figure 18:
Average Residential Tariff by Monthly Consumption,  Source: BERC Agricultural
pumps, non-residential customers, street lights and pumps all have  single rate
Small industry, commercial and medium/high/extra-high voltage have flat, off-
peak and peak rates Rural rates through REB vary from those from urban customers
Tariffs are set such that commercial and industrial customers (&) and high use
residential customers subsidize low use residential and agricultural users
Figure 19 shows BPDB’ tariffs versus the actual cost of delivery by consumer
group Note that the cost of delivery as shown is based on the costs incurred by
BPDB in FY 2013-These costs are understated because the cost of fuel is
subsidized Before the latest drop in international prices of fuel, Government
used to provide about US$ 800 million in annual subsidies for fossil fuels, with
the power sector accounting for about one- third of fossil fuel consumption 32
Figure 19: 2015 BPDB Tariffs vs Delivery Cost, FY2013-2014 Cost of Delivery*
Residential *Generation (42 taka/kWh) + Transmission (22 taka/kWh) +
Distribution ( taka/kWh) Cross-subsidies are not enough to cover the lost
revenue for selling the majority of electricity at below-cost recovery The
average retail tariff ( taka/kWh) in FY  was percent below the total delivery
cost (25 taka/kWh) As  result only PGCB operated with  net operating profit over
that fiscal year BPDB suffered high losses for both generation and distribution
services, while the distribution only companies had moderate losses Figure 20
presents the net operating profit (loss) for the power sector companies in FY
Figure 20: Operating Net Profit (Loss) in FY  Source: Company annual reports
Note: Annual reports were not available for individual PSBs under the REB  Two
of the most significant challenges facing the Bangladesh energy sector are
provision of electricity access to the rural population and improving energy
security SREP funds could potentially address both these challenges Sector
Challenges  Challenge #: Rural Access to Electricity The substantial number of
rural citizens without access to electricity is one of the primary challenges in
the Bangladesh energy sector The lack of service has economic consequences for
some of the poorest regions in the country According to the 2010 Household
Income and Expenditure Survey, Barisal and Rangpur divisions—the divisions with
the highest incidence of poverty—have the lowest percentage of rural households
with access to electricity, at 32 and 24 percent, respectively, though these
rates have been improving Figure 21 shows the percentage of urban and rural
households in 2010 with access to electricity by division National access rates
have since improved to 99 percent urban and 66 percent rural, but there is no
new data for access rates by division The GoB has goals to provide access to
electric services to all citizens in rural areas by SREP funds can help achieve
this goal by supporting investments in off-grid solar PV generation in rural
areas without the potential for grid connection 34 Figure 21: Percentage of
Urban and Rural Households with Electricity by Division, 2010 Source: Bangladesh
Bureau of Statistics, “Report of the Household Income & Expenditure Survey 2010”
Challenge #: Energy Security Energy security in Bangladesh is threatened by
shortages in generation supply and  limited availability of domestic natural
resources The power sector has historically had difficulty keeping up with the
rapid growth in demand and load shedding is regularly needed during peak hours
As discussed in Section  this situation has improved in recent years Days with
load shedding decreased from 284 days in 2012 to 84 in The trend has continued
through the first eight months of 2015 with only four load shed days The supply-
demand gap is being addressed partly with new baseload gas and coal plants
However, most of the gap has been filled with more than 2000 MW of rental power
units procured on three to five year contracts The increased dependence on
these—typically oil fired—units has implications on the cost of generation From
2009 to 2015, the share of oil-fired electricity has increased from  to 20
percent This increase in oil-fired electricity contributed to the fuel cost per
kWh generated going from  to 42 taka/kWh (US$ 014 to US$ 04) over the same
period21 With demand anticipated to grow at the current level of eight percent
per year and ambitious electrification goals adding to this growth, SREP funds
could help develop  more cost effective, long-term solution to meeting power
demand requirements by supporting investment in grid-connected renewable energy
The power supply shortage is complicated by  decline in the availability of
domestic natural gas and biomass resources It has been estimated that
Bangladesh’ natural gas reserves will start to deplete in 2020 if no new gas
reserves are discovered and 21 PGCB Monthly Operational Reports 35 new
technology does not allow increased extraction of gas from existing fields The
uncertainty about reserves has limited the development of gas-based power
generation Biomass is becoming scarcer and more expensive, which negatively
impacts poor households that rely on this fuel source More than 90 percent of
Bangladesh households use traditional biomass for cooking, and biomass accounts
for 50 percent of Bangladesh’ total energy supply The common fuels used are rice
husks, jute sticks, cow dung and wood22 SREP funds could help increase the role
of renewable energy in Bangladesh’ generation mix in both grid-connected and
off-grid areas and reduce dependence on these resources with limited
availability Climate change is another significant challenge faced by Bangladesh
Box  discusses why Bangladesh is one of the most vulnerable countries to the
effects of climate change While this is  challenge of vital importance, it is
not one that can be overcome through SREP support Box : Climate Change and
Bangladesh Bangladesh is one of the world’ most vulnerable countries to climate
change As  low- lying country with many rivers, Bangladesh has  very high flood
risk, both due to monsoons and sea-level rise associated with climate change
Rising temperatures have already begun to shorten the life cycle for rice;
reducing yields Low crop production could increase poverty up to 15 percent by
Higher water levels could lead to higher incidence of waterborne disease, such
as cholera, and result in forced migration due to flooding The World Bank has
noted that Bangladesh is particularly vulnerable to an increase in poverty
headcount rate and risk of chronic poverty as  result of different warming
scenarios Climate change could also reduce the availability of clean water
supply and sanitation The World Risk Report ranks Bangladesh as the fifth most
vulnerable country in the world to climate change In addition, the Climate
Change Vulnerability Index rates Dhaka as one of the five most climate-
vulnerable cities in the world Bangladesh addresses climate change issues
through the Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan, which is
implemented through the donor-funded Bangladesh Climate Change Resilience Fund
(See Table 17 for more details)  Bangladesh has substantial technical potential
for renewable energy generation Resource assessments indicate that Bangladesh
could realize over ,000 GWh of generation from renewable technologies annually
The Government has ambitious targets for renewable development, and  robust and
active private sector has substantial experience increasing access of off-grid
solutions to commercial and residential customers Renewable Energy Sector
Context 22  household energy program has recently been initiated by IDCOL with
World Bank support for dissemination of one million improved cookstoves by The
program also includes support for biogas digesters for cooking Once this program
established the viability of engaging the non-government organizations in demand
creation and supply-chain development for dissemination of improved cookstoves,
the program will be scaled up in Phase II (potentially with GCF funding) 36
However, renewable energy remains  small portion of Bangladesh’ generation
portfolio Installed RE generation capacity is currently 437 MW (see Figure ),
with the 230 MW Kaptai HPP being the only grid-connected RE resource The
remaining 137 MWs of RE capacity include off-grid installations and rooftop
solar providing site-specific service Barriers preventing the scale-up of RE in
Bangladesh include affordability and  lack of available commercial financing;
the lack of  comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for RE; and  lack of
feasibility and technical potential data Figure : Installed RE Capacity by Type
(2015) Source: SREDA This section describes Bangladesh’ renewable energy sector,
and includes an assessment of the potential for different renewable energy
options,  description of the business environment for renewable energy, as well
as  description of the barriers facing renewable energy development in
Bangladesh  Assessment of Electricity Generating RE Technologies An assessment
of available data on the use of RE in Bangladesh was carried out to support the
preparation of the IP This section details the results of the assessment and
describes progress to date on deploying RE technologies in Bangladesh The
results of the resource assessment are shown in Table  37 Table : Summary
Renewable Energy Technical Potential Technology Resource Capacity (MW) Annual
Generation (GWh) Solar Parks Solar 1400* ,000 Solar Rooftop Solar 635 860 Solar
Home Systems Solar 100 115 Solar Irrigation Solar 545 735 Wind Parks Wind 637**
1250 Biomass Rice husk 275 1800 Biogas Animal waste 10 40 Waste to Energy
Municipal Waste   Small Hydropower Plants Hydropower 60 200 Mini and
Microgrids*** Hybrid ***  Total ,666 ,010 *Case  (agricultural land excluded)
estimate **Case  (flood-prone land excluded) estimate ***Based on planned
projects only, not  theoretical maximum potential, because there is potential
overlap with off-grid solar systems Either could be used to serve off-grid
demand The resource potential for solar parks was  conservative estimate that
excluded agricultural land and assumed that only two percent of the available
land for solar parks would be suitable for development, in order to take into
account potential land obstructions If this assumption were raised to five
percent, the resource potential for solar parks would be ,500 MW This would
bring potential RE capacity to ,766 MW in total  Solar Parks There are currently
no complete solar park projects in Bangladesh, but five projects with  total
installed capacity of MW are currently under construction or have financing
committed In addition, the GoB has recently approved  proposal for  200 MW solar
park on ,000 acres of non-agricultural land in Teknaf of Cox’ Bazar, to be
carried out by SunEdison Energy Holding (Singapore) Private Ltd The Power
Development Board will buy electricity from the project at Tk 26 per kWh for 20
years23 Data on solar radiation were from  Solar Wind Energy Resource Assessment
(SWERA) that had been completed by the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP)
and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) in 24 The technical potential of solar
parks was 23 The Daily Star,  October 24 SWERA data consisted of Typical
Meteorological Year (TMY) data files for eight locations, shown as green dots on
the resource maps 38 determined by first evaluating the overall resource
potential, in terms of solar radiation, and then applying exclusions to limit
this potential to only areas practical for development Solar park locations were
preferred to be within 20 km of  transmission line and could not be located on
land with  slope greater than five percent, forest land, wetland, urban areas,
historical flood areas, military bases, or protected areas25 The GoB has
stipulated that solar parks should only be developed on government- owned non-
agricultural land or privately-owned uncultivable land Two cases were developed
to show the resource potential when agricultural land is excluded (Case ) and
when it is included (Case ) In both cases only two percent of the eligible land
was assumed to be suitable for development, in order to take into account
potential land obstructions Figure  below shows the resource locations
identified; the results of the resource assessment are presented in Table  The
two percent assumption was used so as to be conservative in estimates of
potential but also to ensure that the assessment of potential was roughly
consistent with Government targets for solar resource development (see Section )
Figure : Solar Park Resource Maps Case  Case  25 Land exclusions were applied
using GIS data Land gradient, forest, wetland, protected areas, and urban areas
data were from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory’ (NREL) Geospatial
Toolkit for Bangladesh Historical flood information for  was from the Bangladesh
Water Development Board 39 Table : Solar Parks Technical Potential Case  Case
Admin Division Capacity Factors (%)** Land (km2) Land (km2) Capacity (MW) Annual
Generation (GWh) Capacity (MW) Annual Production (GWh) Barisal* 116 14 ,136 ,034
,Chittagong ,200 ,050 ,13,666 ,416 ,960 Dhaka 74 18 13,472 ,368 ,Khulna 200 50
71 964 ,420 Rajshahi ,692 ,922 ,Rangpur  15,378 ,844 ,192 Sylhet ,094 274 ,900
974 ,Total ,692 ,408 ,67,028 18,978 23,*Capacity factors calculated using PVsyst
modeling software **Barisal Division is assumed to have the same resource as the
Chittagong site due to proximity  Solar Rooftop Solar rooftop systems are grid
connected systems that provide onsite power at the point of installation and
then feed excess power to the grid Approximately 14 MW in solar rooftop PV
systems have been installed in Bangladesh but most of this capacity produces
little energy and is not grid connected Most of the rooftop PV installations on
new buildings are the result of  government requirement for  certain percentage
of lighting loads to come from solar for getting  new grid connection In the
absence of  clear regulation and lack of inspection and monitoring, many of
these installations are reported to be put up merely to satisfy the requirements
for getting  new grid connection, and are not up to standards to produce any
meaningful energy The remaining capacity is from BPDB installation on several
Government buildings, such as  kWp system on the Prime Minister’ Office,  75 kWp
system on the WAPDA office building, and  kWp system on the Bidyut Bhaban
building  50 kWp system on the Secretariat building is the only such grid
connected rooftop installation The SWERA solar radiation data were again used to
assess solar resources Availability of land was assessed using two existing
studies on rooftop space available for solar PV in parts of Dhaka and Chittagong
Box  summarizes the approach and results of these studies 40 Box : Rooftop
Availability Studies The following studies on available rooftop space for solar
PV were used in the technical analysis: ; CEPZ Study (2014) The Chittagong
Export Processing Zone (CEPZ) is  37 hectare trade zone with 501 industrial
plots ranging from 718 to ,350 m2 Researchers at Go for Green and Bangladesh
University of Engineering and Technology divided CEPZ into six zones and used
Google Earth line measurement tools to estimate the approximate area of roof
space in each zone Roofs were categorized as either south facing, west facing,
or flat; and roofs covered by obstacles were excluded Total available rooftop
for solar PV system in the CEPZ was estimated as 170,810 m2 (17 km2) ; Dhaka
City Study (2010) Researchers in the Department of Geography at Humboldt-
University of Berlin estimated the potential sunlit rooftop area within the high
building density areas of the Dhaka City Corporation (now Dhaka City North and
Dhaka City South) The study used Object-based Image Analysis (OBIA) on  high-
resolution satellite image taken in 2006 to estimate rooftop area with bright
sunlight In other words, the researchers set color, shape, and scale parameters
representative of  bright rooftop that OBIA software used to analyze the image
and report the total area meeting those parameters The results indicate that
there are 554 km2 of bright rooftop space in the Dhaka City North and Dhaka City
South combined There are limitations to this approach-- the study excluded
rooftops in informal settlements, but there were no other restrictions on the
type of building or roof ; Dhanmondi Study (2014) Researchers from American-
International University- Bangladesh and the Asian Institute of Technology
(Bangkok) refined the results of the Dhaka City Study by manually measuring
(using Google Maps and ArcGIS software) bright rooftops in  83 km2 area around
the Dhanmondi neighborhood in southern Dhaka City The researchers considered
several factors for excluding rooftops, such as construction and design
constraints; shade from trees and nearby buildings; obstacles on the rooftop;
and rooftop orientation Approximately 50 percent of the bright rooftop area
found using the Dhaka City Bright Rooftop Study approach was found to actually
be suitable for solar rooftop systems in the Dhanmondi area Source: Chakraborty,
Sanjib et al “Possibilities and potentialities of roof top solar PV system
within Chittagong export processing zone (CEPZ), Bangladesh” Proceedings of 5th
International Conference on Environmental Aspects of Bangladesh, It was assumed
that 50 percent of bright rooftop area found in the Dhaka Rooftop Study (277
km2) are buildings that would be available for housing  rooftop system,
combining the results of the Dhaka study and the assumptions of the Dhanmondi
study Because the CEPZ results include  more comprehensive analysis of the
structures, the entire estimated area (17 km2) is included  total of 447 km2
roof space is assumed to be available The technical potential was calculated by
treating the estimated areas as one large rooftop covered with ,000  solar
modules that take up approximately 29 m2 (100 ft2) The technical potential also
includes an additional 81 MWs from three national programs targeting ()
installation of solar rooftop systems on schools (41 ME), (ii) railroad stations
(30 MW), and (iii) commercial and industrial buildings (10 MW) 26 In order to
calculate potential generation, the 26 It is assumed these targets were based on
estimates of actual rooftop availability 41 capacity factors used for solar
parks were modified to take into account the potential suboptimal location of
rooftop system compared to  solar park Table  shows capacity factors for solar
rooftop systems and solar home systems Table : Capacity Factors for Rooftop
Solar and Solar Home Systems Rajshahi Chittagong Dhaka Khulna Sylhet Rangpur
Barisal* National -% -% % % % % % % Note: Rajshahi includes measurements for
Bogra and Ishurdi; Chittagong includes measurements for Chittagong City and Cox’
Bazaar *Barisal is based on Chittagong City measurements  Solar Home Systems
Solar home systems (SHS) are low capacity solar PV-battery units that provide
electricity to individual or clustered off-grid customers SHS installation has
already been one of the most successful RE initiatives in Bangladesh, with
around  million units installed since 2003, with over 35,000 systems installed
per month IDCOL has set  target to fund  million SHS units by IDCOL’
installation targets are used as  basis for estimating the SHS market Given that
approximately  million IDCOL-funded installations that would have been completed
by the end of 2015, another  million more SHS units need to be installed to
achieve the 2017 target The installation target was allocated among the 11 SHS
size options offered by IDCOL, with more units being allocated to the most
commonly sold sizes Table  shows the number of SHS units by size included in the
technical potential Table : Allocation of SHS Units in Technical Potential % of
Installation Target Total Capacity (MW) Annual Production (GWh)* SHS Size SHS
Units 20 Wp 30 Wp 40 Wp 50 Wp 60 Wp 65 Wp 75 Wp 85 Wp 90 Wp 100 Wp 130 Wp Totals
% % % % % % % % % % % 100% 100,000 500,000 400,000 300,000 200,000 100,000
100,000 100,000 100,000 50,000 50,000 ,000,000  15 16 15        100 72 37 72 37
29 83 18 54 22 79 83 86 *Assumes capacity factor of %  Wind Farms  900 kW plant
at the Muhuri Dam and  1000 kW plant on Kutubdia remain the only grid-connected
wind farms currently in operation 42 Wind speed and land availability were the
determining factors in assessing the technical potential Wind resources were
evaluated using AWS Truepower’ WindNavigator data that provide estimates of wind
speed, wind speed distribution, wind direction, and diurnal patterns at  height
of 80  above ground level For  location to be considered  viable site it was
required to be located preferably within 20 km of  transmission line Land not
suitable for wind farm installation was excluded from the assessment27 Flooding
is  concern for wind farms because softening of the soil could compromise the
foundation of the turbines Two cases were developed by combining the AWS data
with GIS flood data, showing the resource potential when flood prone land is
excluded (Case ) and when it is included (Case ) The AWS data were also used to
evaluate the resource potential according to capacity factor In both cases,
fifty percent of the eligible land was assumed to be suitable for development,
in order to take into account potential land obstructions The results of the
resource assessment are presented in Table  Figure : Wind Park Resource
Potential Maps Case  Case  27 Land excluded from the technical assessment
included slopes greater than or equal to 15%; forests; wetland; and urban areas
43 Table : Wind Farms Technical Potential Case One Case Two % Capacity Factor %
Capacity Factor % Capacity Factor % Capacity Factor Buildable MW 624 13 996 37
Biomass Rice byproducts, particularly rice husk and rice straw, are the most
readily available biomass feedstock for power generation Because rice straw is
more beneficial left in the field as fertilizer or for use as  direct cooking
fuel, only rice husk is viewed as  viable feedstock option Other options, such
as wood biomass, are limited because 37 of 63 districts partially or completely
protect local forests from deforestation, and what resources are available are
used for residential cooking There is currently  250 kW off-grid rice husk plant
in the Kapasia upazlia and  400 kW rice husk plant proposed for Thakurgaon An
estimated 13 million tons of rice husk are produced annually in Bangladesh28 It
is assumed that that only 50 percent of rice husk is available for electricity
generation and that only 10 percent of the gross resource potential is located
at  sufficiently large commercial rice operation to host  digester for
electricity production The energy content of rice husk is assumed to be 16 MJ/kg
and that the biomass plant has  heat rate of 13,648 btu/kWh The technical
potential results are shown in Table  Table : Biomass Technical Potential Annual
Rice Husk Crop (tons) HHV (MJ/kg) Gross Energy Potential* (mmBTU) Gross
Electricity Potential (MWh) Net Electricity Potential (MWh)** Potential Capacity
(MW) 10,130,000 16 139,363,715 ,084,514 ,042,258 274 *Based on heat rate of
13,648 btu/kWh **Assume 50 % of Rice Husk is available for electricity
generation  Biogas Farms in Bangladesh are installing small-scale biogas plants
that use animal waste to produce power for own-use purposes There are currently
two IDCOL-funded plants— 400 kW and 50 kW—in operation with four more plants
ranging in size from 25 to 100 kW under construction Cow manure is also
possible fuel option at large commercial operations where the manure is less
likely to be needed for domestic cooking 28 Das, Barun Kumar, and   Hoque
"Assessment of the Potential of Biomass Gasification for Electricity Generation
in Bangladesh" Journal of Renewable Energy 2014 (2014) 44 purposes GIZ has
provided technical assistance and some funding to poultry and dairy farms that
have installed an aggregate of ,200 kW in small- to medium-sized engine biogas
fueled generators ( kW to 50 kW)29 Resource potential was determined by
estimating the amount of animal waste available for electricity generation Only
livestock at commercial farms were considered because animal waste at
subsistence farms has other uses, such as cookstove fuel and fertilizer
Agricultural statistics from the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) were used
to determine the number of poultry and cattle at commercial operations Yield of
waste per animal head was assumed to be 01 ton per cattle and 12 kg per bird30
Between these two waste-to-energy options, poultry is more viable because it is
local product, while cows are imported from India Figure  shows the resource
potential by location for poultry and cattle waste Figure : Commercial Farming
Animal Waste Resource Maps Poultry Cattle It was assumed that only 10 percent of
the resource potential is located at commercial operations large enough to host
digester The technical assessment from this potential assumes that conversion of
waste to biogas is 47 m3/ton of cattle manure and 200 m3/ton for chicken waste,
and that biogas consists of 50 percent methane The biogas plant is assumed to
have  reciprocating engine efficiency of 10,000 kWh/btu and capacity factor of
50 percent The technical potential results are shown in Table  29 “Meeting
Energy Needs with Biogas Technology,” GIZ, accessed April 16, 2015,  30
Netherlands Development Organization, Domestic Biogas in Bangladesh, 2005 45
Table : Biogas Technical Potential Division Technical Potential (MWh)* Estimated
Capacity Potential (kW)** Commercial Cattle & Buffalo Commercial Fowl & Duck
Commercial Cattle & Buffalo Commercial Fowl & Duck Barisal ,989 16,189 45 370
Chittagong 11,364 69,243 259 ,581 Dhaka 18,452 188,138 421 ,295 Khulna 11,095
26,983 253 616 Rajshahi 15,999 33,193 365 758 Sylhet ,383 18,946 32 433 60,282
Total *Based on  heat rate of 10,000 btu/kWh ** Determined by assuming  capacity
factor of 50% 352,692 ,376 ,052  Waste-to-Energy (Electricity) Waste-to-energy
plants use municipal household waste for power production Approximately 13,383
tons of solid waste are produced daily in Bangladesh; more than ,379 tons come
from Dhaka alone As part of  solid waste management (SWM) technical assistance
project, JICA set target goals for advancing SWM in Dhaka, including the
development of plans for waste-to-energy31 In 2012, Dhaka North City Corporation
and Dhaka South City Corporation announced plans to build two waste- to-energy
plants: an incineration plant in Matuali and an anaerobic digester in Aminbazar
The plans intended for the plants to be commissioned with  combined capacity to
process ,000 tons of waste and produce 10 MW of power, and then increase
capacity to process ,000 tons of waste and 50 MW of power within three years32
Despite  successful bidding process, the construction of the plants has been
delayed several times and has not yet started33 One reason construction has been
delayed is the fact that the city governments have had problems developing
processes for waste collection Despite vast resource potential (in terms of
daily municipal waste production), the actual technical potential cannot be
estimated without established procedures for delivering the waste to  power
plant The GoB now intends to start   MW pilot waste-to-energy project that will
be used to establish waste collection practices The technical potential is set
at the proposed pilot plant size The capacity factor is assumed to be 80 percent
31 Project for Strengthening of Solid Waste Management in Dhaka City (Extension)
JICA Terminal Evaluation Report 32 Alam, Helemul “Power from garbage: Govt-run
plant to generate 50MW electricity using garbage of Dhaka city” The Daily Start,
18 August <  33 Mahmu, Abu Hayat “Waste-fueled power plant dream yet to come to
life in 15 years” Dhaka Tribune, 24 < September dream-yet-come-life-15-years> 46
Small Hydropower The only existing hydropower plants in Bangladesh are the 230
MW Kaptai Hydropower Plant and  10 kW Micro-hydropower plant in Bamerchara  2014
study by Stream Tech ( US-based engineering firm) for The Ministry of Power,
Energy and Mineral Resources identified potential hydropower sites at different
locations along the Sangu, Matamuhuri, and Bakkhali Rivers, as well as the
Banshkhali Eco-park stream The technical assessment only includes the sites from
this study because other studies on potential hydropower sites were either
outdated or provided inadequate information for  technical assessment The
technical assessment consisted of an estimate of the generation potential at
each site Topographic analysis was performed using GIS-based Digital Elevation
Model (DEM) data to determine the available gross hydraulic head at each site
hydrologic model was developed to simulate the river flows at the selected sites
over  15-year period based on observed stream flow data () from the Bangladesh
Water Development Board (BWDB) Hydropower has limited potential in Bangladesh
due to concerns about land use and flooding The construction of the Kaptai dam
in 1961 displaced about 100,000 people from the Chittagong Hills Tracts due to
flooding caused by the dam’ reservoir34  Microgrids/Minigrids Microgrids are
autonomous grids used to deliver power to customers in remote areas Microgrid
activity in Bangladesh involves the use of solar minigrids between  kWp The
first minigrid in Bangladesh was commissioned on Sandwip Island in Since then,
three other minigrids have been installed in Kutubdia (100 kWp); Rajshahi (141
kWp); and Narsingdhi (141 kWp) Another 12 projects ranging from 100 to 228 kWp
have been approved for IDCOL financing and are at various stages of development
IDCOL currently has  list of 20 minigrid projects for which private companies
have submitted initial requests for funding The assessment assumes these 20
projects encompass the current minigrid technical potential 10 Solar Pumps Solar
pumps use solar energy to pump water The systems are primarily used for
irrigation purposes but can also provide pumping for domestic water or fish pond
aeration when the pumps are not in use for irrigation There are approximately 34
million diesel irrigation pumps in operation in Bangladesh Because each solar
irrigation pump could replace three to four diesel pumps, there is potential to
replace these pumps with 335,000 to 450,000 solar pumps Currently only large 11
kWp systems installed on three- to four-crop per year land are assumed to be
viable projects IDCOL has plans to install 50,000 of these 11 kWp systems by As
of June 2015, 156 pumps have been installed and an additional 149 pumps have
been approved for installation The resource potential included in the IP is set
based on the 34  comprehensive-response-required-to-complex-displacement-crisis
47 remaining pump installations needed to reach IDCOL’ 2025 goal Power
generation potential was estimated using the same capacity factors used for
solar parks 11 Geothermal There are several locations in Bangladesh with
potential geothermal resources but due to  lack of additional technical
information on these sites no technical potential can be confirmed  study of
Bottom Hole Temperature (BHT) of 13 deep wells drilled for petroleum exploration
in northeastern part of Bangladesh measured temperature gradient in each well at
depths of 3000 to 15,000 35 The results show that 11 of these locations have
temperature gradients of at least 30° per km Extensive investments in studies
and well drilling are necessary to confirm the resource adequacy of these sites
12 Hydrokinetic Generation Hydrokinetic generating units are turbines installed
in river beds Technology is being developed for the purpose of harnessing river
flows without reservoir impoundments When determining the technical potential
the effects of river morphology must be considered, as well as impacts on river
navigation Hydrokinetic generation could be considered for Brahmaputra and
Meghna river basins In these areas more than 100 MW of installed capacity could
potentially be possible with lower impact compared to conventional hydro
However, this technology is still emerging, with only  few MWs of capacity
deployed worldwide Hydrokinetic generation has proved to be commercially viable
in Germany, Austria and Italy, but there is  lack of information on costs and
technical viability to sufficiently evaluate it for the Bangladesh context
Hydrokinetic generation may be well suited for future application in Bangladesh
if viability is proven over the next ten years 13 Tidal Power Tidal power is
another emerging renewable energy technology Dams or barrages with water
turbines can be built across river mouths or inlets to generate electricity from
the movement of tides The benefit of tidal power is that power production is
more predictable and consistent than either wind or solar The amount of
electricity generated depends on the range of the tide Bangladesh has  tidal
range of - meters, which may be too low for tidal power to be  viable option In
addition to the low resource potential, limited international experience—only
seven tidal power stations are in operation—make this technology impractical for
Bangladesh at this time  Assessment of Other RE Technologies As discussed in
Section , biomass is the main source of energy for domestic consumers and
cooking is the primary use of fuel RE technologies are being introduced in
Bangladesh that allow for more efficient use of biomass or aim to provide an
alternative to biomass-based cooking The follow sub-sections describe the
potential for these technologies 35 Khandoker,  and  Haque “Temperature
Distribution and its Relation to Hydrocarbon Accumulation in Sylhet Trough,
Bangladesh” Bangladesh Journal of Geology, 48  Solar Water Heating Solar water
heating systems (SWHS) have potential commercial and industrial uses in
Bangladesh For example, the tanning industry has been identified as an industry
with great potential for solar water heating UNIDO has already installed three
pilot SWHS systems on tanneries If SWHS were installed to meet the 120 million
liters of hot water required by the 200 tanneries in Bangladesh each year, more
than 67 m3 of natural gas could be replaced annually Textile factories are also
considered locations where SWHS can be used to heat water for dying purposes
GIZ study estimates that there is the potential for some 10,000 SWHS to be
installed for providing  million liters of hot water daily to textile factories
Improved Cookstoves (ICS) Traditional cookstoves used in Bangladesh are
inefficient and release smoke into homes Newer biomass-based cookstoves have
been developed that use fuel up to 50 percent more efficiently and emit less
smoke ICS projects have been some of the most successful energy initiatives in
Bangladesh, with more than  million ICS installed since 36 More recently, IDCOL
has embarked upon an ICS program with World Bank support to disseminate one
million ICS by 2018 based on the public-private partnership approach of the
successful SHS program The GoB’ Country Action Plan for Clean Cookstoves
(November 2013) set  target to reach 100 percent market penetration by 2030,
goal that will require the dissemination of 30 million ICS As many as 67 percent
of households use more than one stove; if these are taken into account, there
could be demand for an additional 20 million37  Biogas for Domestic Cooking
Another alternative to traditional cookstoves is to deliver biogas to
residential homes for cooking purposes Domestic biogas plants are small-capacity
( to  m3) anaerobic digesters designed for individual household use38 There have
also been  few medium-capacity systems installed to serve clusters of homes
Digesters are fed mostly with cattle and poultry waste, though kitchen and
household waste and human excreta are also used More than 33,000 domestic biogas
plants have been installed using IDCOL funding, with Grameen Shakti implementing
the majority of the projects as  partner organization Due to the
interchangeability between ICS and biogas plants it is difficult to determine
the demand for domestic biogas plants  2005 study produced by SNV Netherlands
and IDCOL suggests the market potential could be as 36 Md Raisul Alam Mondal,
Department of Environment, Government of Bangladesh “Mitigation of Short Lived
Climate Pollutants (SLCPs) in Bangladesh and Integration in National Policies
and Strategies”, Climate and Clean Air Available: Event,
Bangladesh_Presentation_CCAC_COP20_11_Dec_Agriculturepdf Agriculture December
Coalition (CCAC) Lima, Side 11 37 Government of Bangladesh Ministry of Power,
Energy, and Mineral Resources Power Division Country Action Plan for Clean
Cookstoves November 38 Kabir, ,   Palash, and  Bauer "Appraisal of domestic
biogas plants in Bangladesh" Bangladesh Journal of Agricultural Economics 35, no
- (2012) 49 high as 950,000 domestic biogas plants39 IDCOL has set  target to
install just 100,000 domestic biogas plants by As  conservative assumption, the
current IDCOL target is used as the assumed market potential  Waste-to-Energy
(Natural Gas) In addition to generating power, municipal waste can also be used
as  source of natural gas Producing gas from municipal waste faces the same
waste collection issues faced by waste-to-power projects; therefore, more
studies would be needed to estimate technical potential for producing gas from
waste The GoB, however, has proposed the Clean City Clean Fuel project as  pilot
project to demonstrate the potential of municipal waste for gas production The
Clean City Clean Fuel project plans to install anaerobic digesters in 20
municipalities that each generate around 20- 100 tons of solid waste per day
Natural gas would either be piped to residential houses or picked up by
customers at fill stations Assuming  yield of 367 m3 per ton of waste 40 , this
project could produce to 731 TCM of natural gas daily In addition, the byproduct
from the anaerobic digester could eventually be sold as fertilizer following
three-year composting period  Cost of RE Technologies The comparative cost of
renewable energy technologies is an important factor when determining their
viability and attractiveness for inclusion in Bangladesh’ electricity
development plan 41 This section includes supply curves which show the levelized
energy costs (LECs) of the various grid-connected and off-grid renewable energy
technologies assessed in Bangladesh for the preparation of the Investment Plan,
as well as the estimated production of each of those technologies The LECs of
the various grid-connected renewable energy technologies were assessed on an
economic and financial basis The purpose of economic analysis is to understand
which supply options are the best option for Bangladesh, irrespective of the
actual cost of financing that would be used for the projects  social discount
rate is used for economic analysis, where the rate (10 percent) reflects an
estimate of the social opportunity cost of capital for the country Concessional
financing terms are used to evaluate financial viability in order to demonstrate
the potential for each technology to attract private investment The assumptions
used for the viability analysis are shown in Table  39 Ghimire, Prakash  “Final
Report on Technical Study of Biogas Plants Installed in Bangladesh” National
Program on Domestic Biogas in Bangladesh SNV and IDCOL, December 40 US
Environmental Protection Agency “Turning Food Waste into Energy at the East Bay
Municipal Utility District (EBMUD)” <  Accessed on 15 July 41 The cost of
renewable energy was not, however, the only criterion used for selecting project
to be included in the Investment Plan It is only one of  number of factors that
was considered in the course of developing this investment plan Section
describes the other criteria used to select the projects for which SREP funding
is requested 50 Table : Economic and Financial Viability Assumptions Financial
Economic Debt/equity split (%) 70 100 Debt rate (%) 00 00 Equity return (%) 00 /
Debt term (years)  Life of the asset VAT (15%) Yes No Section  shows the LECs
for grid-connected technologies and Section  shows the LECs for off-grid
technologies  summary of the costs of the other renewable energy technologies
(non-electricity) considered for the IP are presented in Section   Grid-
Connected Cost assumptions for each RE technology are based on costs of existing
projects in Bangladesh; IDCOL reference data; and generic international costs
adjusted for the Bangladesh context Assumptions used for each grid-connected
project are presented in Table  Table : Cost Assumptions for Grid-Connected RE
Technologies Technology Capital Cost ($/kW) Fixed Cost & (US$/ kW-year) Variable
&MA ($/kWh) Heat Rate (BTU/ kWh) Capacity Factor (%) 16-% Solar Parks $1551 $26
---- ---- $130B -%  Solar Rooftop $1561 ---- ---- %  Wind Farm $1625-$2000 $35
---- ---- Small Hydro $2090-$6080 $57-$111 ---- ---- 40% 70% Waste to Energy
$2995 $115 $02 18,000 Notes: () Includes cost of fuel () Includes roof lease
payment () Capacity factor ranges by location Figure  and Figure  show the
supply curves for the various grid-connected projects under the described
economic and financial viability scenarios For purpose of comparison each figure
has  horizontal line (yellow, solid lines) with the current price of diesel
generation42 and two horizontal lines (red, solid and hash-marked lines) 42 Cost
of diesel is the average cost of rental power diesel generators in 51
representing the range in LEC of  new coal plant43 The price of diesel is meant
to demonstrate the competiveness of RE options with RPPs, the short run power
supply option The price of coal generation represents  likely long run power
supply option given the projected depletion of domestic natural gas reserves
Figure : RE Supply Curves for Grid-Connected Electricity (Economic Viability) 43
LEC of coal range assumes  low coal price of US$ 138/ton; high import price of
US$ 300/ton; and $,600/kW capital cost The coal price includes the cost of CO2
emissions as listed in the most recent WB Guidance Note 52 Figure : RE Supply
Curves for Grid-Connected Electricity (Financial Viability)  Off-Grid
Electricity Similar to grid-connected technologies, the cost assumptions for
each off-grid technology are based on costs of existing projects in Bangladesh;
IDCOL reference international costs adjusted for the Bangladesh context data;
and generic Assumptions used for each off-grid technology are presented in Table
53 Table 10: Cost Assumptions for Off-Grid RE Technologies Technology Capital
Cost ($/kW) Fixed Cost & (US$/ kW-year) Variable & ($/kWh)  Heat Rate (BTU/ kWh)
Capacity Factor (%) SHSB $3555-$6547 $245-$456 ---- ---- 18% MicrogridC $255D
$5000 ---- ---- 41-% Solar irrigation pumps $3273 $150 ---- ---- 43% ---- ----
Small Hydro $2090-$6080 $57-$111 40% Biomass (Rice Husk) $2059 $125 $06 13,648
75% Biogas (Animal Waste) $6100 $125 $02 12,000 50% Note: () Includes cost of
fuel/feedstock; () The IDCOL costs used for SHS include post-installation
service and  five-year battery warranty Due to these embedded cost items, the
LEC estimates of SHS may not be directly comparable to the cost in other
countries; () Cost of microgrid includes investment for backup generation; ()
Fixed & includes fuel costs for diesel generator, assuming: 12,000 btu/kWh; US$
25/mmBTU cost of diesel; and  diesel generator capacity factor of two percent;
() Costs are exclusive of potential any import duties Figure  and Figure  show
the supply curves for the various off-grid projects under the economic and
financial viability scenarios The figures in this section also include two
horizontal lines (red, solid and hashed-mark lines) representing  range in the
off- grid diesel generation cost44, for the purpose of comparison with renewable
energy options45 44 Assumes low diesel price of US$ 22/mmBTU; high price of US$
28/mmBTU; and diesel generator efficiency of 16,000 btu/kWh 45 For simplicity
diesel generation is assumed to be the alternative comparison for all options
The cost of kerosene lighting and battery charging units may be  more
appropriate alternative for SHS 54 Figure : RE Supply Curves for Off-Grid
Electricity (Economic Viability) Figure : RE Supply Curves for Off-Grid
Electricity (Financial Viability) 55  Cost of Other RE Technologies This section
presents  summary of the costs of the other RE technologies considered in the IP
Due to the limited details on the specifics of the Clean City Clean Fuel project
costs could not be estimated for the provision of gas services from municipal
waste ICS The most common biomass based ICS is the chulha model The cost of
chulha stove ranges depending on region and material Concrete models ($) can be
built in - hours and last approximately three years Clay models ($) are built in
to  days and last more than five years46 The payback period for ICS is - months
due to around 50 percent savings in fuel compared to traditional stoves Biogas
for Domestic Cooking  biogas cooking system includes both an aerobic digester
and  biogas cookstove The system costs range from US$ 330-$47 Solar Water
Heating  SWHS systems consists of  solar water heating panel and an adjoining
water tank The cost of  ,000 liter SWHS is approximately US$ , Barriers to RE
Sections  and  provided estimates of the technical potential for RE technologies
in Bangladesh, and Section  showed that many of these technologies are
economically and financially viable Despite this significant potential the
market for many of these technologies has been slow to develop There are  number
of regulatory, financial and technical barriers that, when addressed will
accelerate renewable energy investment in Bangladesh New regulations, such as
establishment of  formal feed-in tariff and provisions for compensating minigrid
investors after transmission expansion, will reduce risk and send strong signals
to investors Grant funding and low-interest financing will help to address
concerns about affordability for both grid-connected and off-grid projects
Reduced financing costs can also offset the high cost of procuring land for
projects, land scarcity being one of the key barriers to investment Successful
renewable energy pilot projects will provide better access to data on renewable
energy; and demonstrate successful business models that can be replicated by
local banks; and allow local workers the opportunity to learn the necessary
technical skills Table 11 describes some of the most significant barriers
hindering the development of renewable energy in Bangladesh The investment
program described in Section  includes measures to address many of the most
substantial barriers Moreover, the ongoing IDA technical assistance program
(under the Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Development II, RERED II
project) will support the development of legal and regulatory frameworks for
grid-connected RE Implemented by the Power Cell of the Ministry of Power, Energy
and Mineral Resources, the TA is flexible to 46 Accenture Development Partners
Sector Mapping Analysis, Bangladesh Market Assessment Global Alliance for Clean
Cookstoves, 47 Ibid 56 support any consultancy services to assess the barriers
and provide recommendations for addressing them including development of the
legal and regulatory frameworks for scaling up renewable energy in Bangladesh 57
Table 11: Barriers to Renewable Energy Development and Mitigation Options Solar
Home System Solar Park Solar Rooftop Wind Farm Small Hydro Solar Irrigation
Barrier Bioenergy Microgrid Financial and Economic    Limited fiscal space
for utility-scale grid-connected projects Affordability of off-grid
technologies, including initial investment in SHS and cost recovery tariff for
microgrids, as end-users lack income   Limited availability of commercial
funding, as commercial banks do not yet have experience making RE loans and so
view these investments as risky Where available, there are high financing costs
and short loan tenors          High import tariffs restrict competition
in supply   Limited land availability, with high market prices Seasonal
demand, as some RE technologies depend on agricultural activities and thus have
low capacity and high LEC          Limited track record for private
sector financing of RE projects Policy         Few policy incentives for
RE Absence of comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for RE, most
importantly,  lack of feed-in tariffs for grid-connected RE generation; no
standardized process for procuring IPPs; no standardized PPA for sale of RE
generation intro grid; and no rules governing extension of grid to areas already
served by microgrids     58 Solar Home System Solar Park Solar Rooftop Wind
Farm Small Hydro Solar Irrigation Barrier Bioenergy Microgrid Incomplete
coordination between involved ministries, agencies and institutions In
particular, the promise of grid connection to certain areas may inhibit
investment in microgrids or other off-grid technologies    Technical Lack of
data and information on RE feasibility and RE experience in Bangladesh, and
technical potential for wind and solar rooftops       Lack of skilled
labor for maintenance and repair of certain RE technologies Installations may be
improperly sized, use poor quality components, and be done under inappropriate
conditions             Seasonal flooding 59  Role of Private Sector
The private sector in Bangladesh has been very active in the renewable energy
sector and has helped increase access of off-grid solutions to commercial and
residential customers through financing mechanisms such as microloans, low
interest loans, retail sales, and some generation investment The GoB has played
substantial role in incentivizing private sector participation by creating
commercially viable market for the uptake of RE technology, using guaranteed
refinancing schemes delivered through IDCOL and the Bangladesh Bank48 The most
common types of private sector players include: private commercial banks,
foreign commercial banks, non-governmental organizations (NGO), and retailers49
Commercial banks The Bangladesh Bank Refinancing Scheme for Renewable Energy is
revolving refinancing mechanism that provides loans for RE and energy efficiency
projects such as biogas, solar, bio-fertilizer plants, SHS, solar irrigation
pumps, and hybrid Hoffman kilns at low interest rates50 Domestic and foreign
commercial banks have been the leading participants In 2014, Domestic commercial
banks on-lent US$ 57 million to finance RE projects, 90 percent of the total
amount disbursed by the revolving scheme Foreign commercial banks on-lent US$ 05
million to finance RE projects,  percent of the total amount disbursed by the
revolving Table 12 shows the types of RE projects which received financing at
reduced rates in 2014 under the Refinancing Scheme for Renewable Energy Table
12: RE Projects Financed under the Refinancing Scheme for RE in 2014 Solar
Panel/Renewable Energy Plant Biogas Plant Bio-fertilizer Plant HHK Others*
Million US$ Private Commercial Banks 16 00 02 68 70 Foreign Commercial Banks 00
05 00 00 00 *Other includes energy efficiency and  small amount of solar
irrigation and SHS Source: Bangladesh Bank, “Sustainable Banking” in Annual
Report 2014, Non-governmental organizations Non-governmental organizations play
an important role in expanding the uptake of RE technology in Bangladesh As
partner organizations (PO) of IDCOL’ SHS, and domestic 48 The GoB established
the Infrastructure Development Company (IDCOL) in 1997 as an implementing agency
which on-lends grants and loans to partner organizations who in turn procure,
install, and often times refinance loans to households 49 The link provides
list of private sector organizations that are active in the power sector  50 The
SREDA page on financing schemes provides further detail on the types and terms
of loans provided under this scheme  60 biogas programs, NGOs serve as important
intermediaries between IDCOL and customers by directly procuring RE technology
components from suppliers, installing SHS, and on-lending micro loans to
customers (see Figure ) Since 2003 when the SHS program started,  million SHS
systems have been installed and currently serve about 14 percent of the
Bangladeshi population The domestic biogas program which was initiated in 2006
has since financed more than 33,000 biogas plants in Bangladesh Table 13
summarizes the achievements of the IDCOL SHS and Domestic Biogas Programs to
date Box 1Box  describes how IDCOL' SHS, solar irrigation, and solar minigrid
programs are financed Figure : SHS Program by IDCOL Table 13: Achievements of
the IDCOL SHS and Domestic Biogas Programs Program start year No of partner
organizations (2014) Savings in Million US$ Achievements to date (2014)
Energy/fuel savings Program  million systems installed 228 kilotons of kerosene
SHS 2003 47 285 28 kilotons chemical fertilizer; ,000 kiloton of kerosene
Domestic Biogas 33,000 biogas plants 2006 24 20 Source: IDCOL, “Domestic Biogas
Program”, Accessed July , IDCOL, “SHS Program”, Accessed July , 61 Box :
Financing of IDCOL Projects Solar Home System (SHS) The Solar Home System (SHS)
program was started by IDCOL in 2003, with credit and grant support from the
World Bank and GEF The program was later expanded with additional financing from
GIZ, KfW, ABD, IDB, GPOBA, JICA, USAID and DFID IDCOL offers refinancing, grant
support, and technical assistance to 47 Partner Organizations (POs) who
implement the program51 The major POs include Grameen Shakti, Rural Services
Foundation, Srizony Bangladesh, and BRAC Foundation POs purchase the system
components from suppliers (who receive approval from the Technical Standards
Committee) and install the systems and provide service to households52
Households pay the POs  percent of the SHS price at installation, and pay the
rest of the cost over  -year micro-credit period at  flat interest rate of 12 to
15 percent When the life of  battery is over, households have  buy-back and
replacement option Households are also offered  discounted price if they accept
shorter repayment period and also have the option to buy the SHS outright in
cash53 After making an installation, POs apply for refinancing of the micro-
credit and  capital buy- down grant from IDCOL The refinancing from IDCOL covers
80 percent of the micro-credit extended to households, and has   percent flat
interest rate for  period of - years The capital buy-down allows POs to reduce
the costs of SHS to households The grant, which was initially set at US$ 90 per
SHS, is now US$ 20 per SHS of less than 30 Wp size  US$  per SHS institutional
development grant is also provided to new POs to assist with up-front costs of
setting up their establishments54 Solar Irrigation Program IDCOL runs the Solar
Irrigation Program with financing from The World Bank, KfW, GPOBA, JICA, USAID,
ADB and Bangladesh Climate Change Resilience Fund (BCCRF)55 This program has two
business models: the fee for service model, which is currently in use, and the
proposed ownership model, which IDCOL is trying to introduce56 In the fee for
service model, pump operators (private sector sponsors) put in 20 percent of the
project cost as equity and IDCOL provides 40 percent of the cost as  grant and
the remaining 40 percent as credit at   percent interest rate, to be repaid over
period of  years The grant and credit funds are sourced from development
partners There are currently 17 sponsor organizations which have implemented
projects under this model These sponsors purchase TSC-approved equipment (pumps
and PV panels) from suppliers, who install the equipment and provide after-sale
service The sponsors own the pumps and sell water to farmers who pay an
irrigation charge Payments are collected by pump operators57 51 IDCOL "Solar
Home System Program" Accessed July 15,  52 Asaduzzaman, , Mohammad Yunus, AK
Enamul Haque, AKM Abdul Malek Azad, Sharmind Neelormi, and Md Amir Hossain
"Power from the sun: An evaluation of institutional effectiveness and impact of
solar home systems in Bangladesh" Bangladesh Inst Dev Stud(BIDS), Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Final Rep to the World Bank Report (2013) 53 Ibid 54 Ibid 55 IDCOL
"Solar Irrigation Program" Accessed July 15,  56 Rahman, Farzana "IDCOL Solar
Irrigation Projects" February 19, 57 Rahman, Farzana "IDCOL Solar Irrigation
Projects" February 19, 62 The ownership model functions in  similar way for
donors, IDCOL, and suppliers, but has POs (instead of sponsors) who sell the
pump on cash/credit to farmers Under this model farmers will pay 60 percent of
what the pump would cost without  grant They make  20 percent down-payment and
pay the rest in yearly installments for  years, at  15 percent interest rate58
Solar Minigrid Projects IDCOL runs the solar minigrid projects with financing
from The World Bank, KfW, GPOBA, JICA, USAID, ADB and DFID 59 The projects are
implemented through sponsors, who contribute 20% of projects costs from their
own sources and receive 50% grant financing and 30% concessionary financing from
IDCOL The concessionary loans have   percent interest rate and are paid in
quarterly installments over  maximum of 10 years, with   year grace period60 The
grants and concessionary loans are sourced from development partners Sponsors
institutions and private sector companies 61 Sponsors hire & contractors, which
provide & solutions, and EPC contractors, which purchase equipment from
suppliers and provide turnkey solutions The sponsors provide grid connections to
customers (including small shops, health centers, schools, etc), who pay tariffs
to the sponsors 62 Tariffs are US$ 38 per kWh, and customers must also pay  one-
time connection cost of US$  and monthly line rent of US$ - 63 After the project
implementation, minigrids are monitored by IDCOL' monitoring team and
environmental consultant Suppliers also provide after-sale service64 include
NGOs, micro-finance Table 14 below provides details on total financing provided
by IDCOL for each of its RE projects and programs Table 14: IDCOL Financing by
RE Technology Project Cost (US$ million) IDCOL Financing Amount
Projects/programs (US$ million) Solar Home System 15 50 Biogas Program 69 53
Solar irrigation Projects 18 95 Solar mini-grid Projects 39 31 58 Rahman,
Farzana "IDCOL Solar Irrigation Projects" February 19, Accessed July 15, 59
IDCOL "Solar Mini Grid Projects" Accessed July 15,  60 IDCOL "Invitation for
Proposal Submission under IDCOL Solar Mini-Grid Project" Accessed July 15,  61
IDCOL “Expression of Interest: Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program (SREP) under
Climate Investment Funds" 24, April  62Haque, Nazmul “Renewable Energy
Initiatives by Infrastructure Development Company Ltd (IDCOL)" March ,
Energy%20Initiatives%20-%20Nazmul%20Haquepdf Accessed July 15, 63Formanul Islam,
"Financing, Policy & Regulatory Issues of Mini-grid" November, Accessed July 15,
64 IDCOL “Expression of Interest: Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program (SREP)
under Climate Investment Funds" 24, April  63 Biogas based power projects 93 59
ICS 03 61 Total ,37 49 Source: IDCOL The largest partner organization by market
share participating in the IDCOL SHS program is Grameen Shakti (GS) As of March
2014, GS installed 60 percent of SHS systems under the program, while the second
largest partner organization, Rural Services Foundation installed 20 percent of
SHS RE technology retailers There is also substantial private sector
participation in the retail market for RE technology As of September 2014, local
manufacturers made up at least 89 percent of approved vendors under IDCOL’ SHS
program (see Table 15) Table 15: Number of Domestic and International Vendors of
Solar Products (2014) Local Manufacturers Vendors of Imported Equipment
Proportion of Local Production Batteries Large batteries Charge Controller Large
Charge Controller LED Lamps Photovoltaic Modules Large photovoltaic Modules
Inverter Circuit/Fluorescent Luminaire 16 22 34 50 62 15 23      55 89 89% 96%
92% 94% 93% 21% 21% 22  96% Source: IDCOL Private investments in RE generation
There has been growing private sector activity in off-grid RE technologies for
electricity generation Much of this investment is for own use purposes, at dairy
farms or poultry farms where dung or litter is fed into  biogas digester The bio
gas which is produced is used as cooking fuel or for power generation Table 16
lists proposed and completed biogas projects funded by IDCOL from 2010 – Table
16: Proposed and Completed Biogas Projects Name of the project Location Capacity
(kW) COD Rashid Krishi Khamar Ltd Raimony, Trisal 50 June 2010 Phenix Agro Ltd
Member Bari, Gazipur 400 June 2013 Kazi & Kazi Tea Estates Ltd Rowshanpur,
Tetulia 100 *September 2015 Zubaida Poultry Ltd Shashanpara 25 *September 2015
64 Ummi Kulsum Agro Ltd Bhuapur 25 *September 2015 United Integrated Agro Ltd
Bangahati, Sreepur 60 *September 2015 More recently, Purobi Green Energy Limited
(PGEL) and Prokaushali Sangsad Limited (PSL) invested and installed the country’
first solar minigrid on Sandwip Island Purobi Green Energy Limited funded 20
percent of the total project costs, while the remaining amount was financed
through  grant and loan from IDCOL The minigrid is the first utility of its kind
in Bangladesh and has  capacity of 100kW, and  40kW back up diesel generator
There is also some private sector participation in the RE generation investment
Parasol Energy,  subsidiary of the poultry conglomerate Paragon Group, has
proposed to build  solar park on one of its poultry farms   number of
multilateral and bilateral donors are actively involved in promoting in
Bangladesh Table 17 (see next page) describes the renewable energy involvement
for each of the donors in Bangladesh’ energy sector Investments by Development
Partners 50 kWp rooftop solar PV installation on Secretariat building in Dhaka
65 Table 17: Development Partner and Donor Supported Projects and Technical
Assistance Agency Projects ; Grid-Connected Solar PV The GoB is currently
implementing  number of grid-connected Solar PV Projects, including   MW solar
PV plant at the Kaptai Hydro Power Station in Rangamati and   MW ( MW solar + MW
diesel) solar-diesel based hybrid power plant in Hatiya These projects are being
constructed on  turnkey basis, with assistance from ADB ADB ; Sustainable Energy
for Development (SED) Program This program works to promote the efficient use of
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) renewable energy in
Bangladesh through clean cookstoves, biogas digesters, and solar power – Clean
Cookstoves GIZ has installed more than 400,000 new domestic cookstoves and ,000
commercial cookstoves – Biogas GIZ has supported the installation of about ,500
biogas plants in slaughterhouses, and on dairy and poultry farms These now
produce biogas on  commercial scale, which is used for cooking and generating
electricity By December 2013, about  GW of power was being generated with biogas
digesters SED is also working with  tea garden in the Tetulia area of Panchagar
District to explore the possibility of using biogas powered heaters to dry
harvested tea leaves This would replace/save the diesel fuel the garden
presently uses for this purpose – Solar Photovoltaic Pumping (PVP) Systems In
2010, GIZ started installing Solar Photovoltaic Pumping (PVP) Systems for
drinking water supply The program has installed over 100 systems since 2010,
with  total installed capacity of 32 kW and  total pumping capacity of ,209,000
/day Additional support for SED is provided by the Ministry of Power, Energy,
and Mineral Resources ; IDCOL Solar Home System Program The program began in
2003 and works in line with the GoB’ vision of ensuring “Access to Electricity
for All” by IDCOL has installed  million SHS benefiting about 20 million people
who are getting solar electricity as  result of the installations in off-grid
rural areas About 35,000 SHS are noe being installed every month under the IDCOL
program The program replaces 228,000 tons of kerosene (traditionally The World
Bank 66 Agency Projects used for lighting) haven an estimated value of US$ 285
million per year Funding for this program is also provided by GEF, GIZ, KfW,
ADB, IDB, GPOBA, JICA, USAID and DFID ; IDCOL Solar Irrigation Program IDCOL has
target to finance ,550 solar irrigation pumps by So far, 156 pumps have been
installed and another 149 have been approved for financing Funding is also
provided by KfW, GPOBA, JICA, USAID, ADB and Bangladesh Climate Change
Resilience Fund (BCCRF) The BCCRF was established in 2010 for the implementation
of the Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (2009), which calls
for the development of renewable energy, improvement to energy efficiency, and
improvements in the energy consumption patterns of the transport sector The fund
is managed and implemented by GoB, with ongoing temporary assistance from the
World Bank Energy projects supported by the fund include the Solar Irrigation
Program implemented by IDCOL The fund is financed through development partners,
including Denmark, the European Union, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Switzerland,
AusAID and USAID ; IDCOL Biomass Based Power Project IDCOL has created  rice
husk-based power plant (250 kW at Gazipur), built by Dreams Power Private
Limited (DPPL) The plant is connected to  minigrid with the capability of
delivering power to 200 households and 100 small commercial businesses However,
the plant’ current operating capacity is limited to 56 kW allowing it to serve
only 50 houses ; IDCOL Solar Mini Grid Projects IDCOL has  target to finance 50
microgrids around the country by In 2010, IDCOL financed  100 kW solar microgrid
project on Sandwip Island The pilot minigrid project is currently supplying
electricity to  250 neighboring shops,  health centers and  schools Funding for
these projects is also provided by KfW, GPOBA, JICA, USAID, ADB and DFID ; IDCOL
Biogas-Based Power Projects Seven poultry waste-based power plants at different
sites with capacity over  MW, have been established under IDCOL initiatives
IDCOL plans to finance 450 biogas projects with an average of 50kW Funding is
also provided through KfW, USAID, and JICA 67 Agency Projects ; Market Analysis
and Development for Improved Cookstoves (ICS) USAID' Catalyzing Clean Energy in
Bangladesh (CCEB) funds the project, which began in 2013, and aims to develop
framework to facilitate the installation of 350,000 improved cookstoves by USAID
; Enhancing Capacity for Low Emission Development Strategies (EC-LEDS) Wind
resources assessment is currently occurring at  sites and assessments of another
sites will be starting very soon Funding for this wind mapping is also provided
by NREL ; Bangladesh Cookstoves Market Assessment This market assessment on
clean cookstoves estimates that only  percent of households in Bangladesh have
clean cookstove, leaving  potential market of more than million households ;
Sustainable Rural Energy (SRE) Project The Local Government Engineering
Department (LGED) successfully completed the first micro-hydro power unit at
Bamerchara, Chittagong Its installed capacity was 10 kW but due to inadequate
water head falling, only about  kW of power was generated UNDP ; Investment
Prospectus SE4ALL is coordinating with the GoB, IDCOL, and donors to provide
pipeline for energy projects and match investors to investment opportunities in
the sector Current projects under consideration include two clean cooking
projects, third generation SHS upgrades, and three minigrid projects ranging
from 3kW to 100kW,  waste-to-energy project, an LED manufacturing facility, and
brick kiln technology upgrades Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) ; IDCOL
Domestic Biogas Program IDCOL plans to install 100,000 biogas plants in
Bangladesh by 2018, and has financed the construction of 33,000 as of April
Additional funding for this program is also provided by KfW and the World Bank
SNV Netherlands 68  Many of the technologies described in Sections  and  are
important for Bangladesh, but some are better candidates for SREP support than
others This section prioritizes projects based on criteria identified by
stakeholders in preparatory workshops and one-on-one consultations
Prioritization of Renewable Energy Technologies Hydrokinetic power and tidal
power are not considered because the technologies are only on the cusp of
commercial viability, and because the potential resources in Bangladesh have not
yet been studied in much detail Geothermal power is not considered because
substantial additional work will be needed to verify whether the resource is
worth investigating further These resources and technologies may at some point
make important contributions to Bangladesh’ energy mix, but they were not
considered as viable candidates for SREP support Criteria for prioritization The
criteria reflect  consideration of criteria important to SREP as well as
criteria considered by stakeholder to be specifically important for Bangladesh
The criteria are: ; Scalability The amount of developable resource potential
relative to the other technologies, as measured by production potential (GWh)
Resources with higher production potential were given higher priority
Scalability is an important component of the transformation impact SREP seeks to
achieve with its funding, as well as to one of SREP’ expected program outcomes,
increased supply of renewable energy ; Availability of sites As described in
Section  availability of land is an important barrier to the development of
renewable energy in Bangladesh Land has high value for agricultural use, an
important driver of Bangladesh’ economy Land suitable for the development of
utility-scale plants is scarce, also because of seasonal variations in water
levels and the longer-term effects of climate change ; Unexploited market
potential The extent to which the technology is used or the resource in
Bangladesh Resources or technologies which already have financing available
through IFI programs or through the private sector were given lower priority
Resources or technologies which are lesser known, with little or no support,
were given higher priority is already exploited ; Readiness for implementation
Technologies were ranked higher if there was reasonably good data on resource
availability and potential sites or projects Options without good resource data
were ranked lower ; Financial viability Technologies were ranked higher if they
were determined in Section  to be close to being cost-competitive with diesel
generation and therefore less dependent on subsidies Technologies were ranked
lower if it was determined that they would need substantial subsidies 69 Table
shows the rankings assigned to each technology under each criterion, and
provides  brief explanations for why each technology received  particular
ranking on each criterion  distinction is made between grid-connected and off-
grid projects The ranking criteria were used as rough guides and not absolute
decision criteria In the final evaluation, other factors (such as co-benefits)
were also considered by Government in developing the list of priority projects
It is important to note that projects not put forward for SREP funding will be
considered for  second phase (Phase II) investment plan, with funding to be
sought at  later stage from the Green Climate Fund (GCF), MDBs, and other
sources Section  describes the investments to be included in both the Phase
investment plan (with SREP support), and Phase II investment plan (where
additional support will be sought) Summary of Rankings The on-grid projects
ranked with highest priority were utility-scale solar, and rooftop solar The
principal reasons are: ; There is abundant solar potential in Bangladesh, and an
abundance of sites, despite the limited availability of non-agricultural land ;
Few projects have yet broken ground, despite the potential Some type of support
is clearly needed to show that such projects can be done successfully on  larger
scale ; Few specific sites have yet been identified, but solar data in
Bangladesh are of relatively good quality and reliability ; Utility-scale and
rooftop solar are now close to parity, on an LCOE basis, with the cost of diesel
generation from the PPAs emergency diesel generators in Bangladesh Utility-scale
wind projects ranked nearly as well Their viability as potential projects will
depend critically on the wind mapping exercise currently being undertaken by the
Government of Bangladesh and USAID If there proves to be  good number of sites
with good resource profiles, such projects could also be considered for SREP
support under the umbrella of utility-scale renewable energy projects Waste-to-
energy did not rank as high as utility-scale renewable energy, but was included
because of the substantial co-benefits it could have for Bangladesh’ highly
populated urban areas in terms of waste collection and management, and as
further consequence, public health Grid-connected hydropower was not considered
for SREP funding, because of the lack of reliable data on sites and because of
the social and environmental problems Bangladesh has had in the past with
hydropower projects Hydropower projects will, however, be studied further for
possible inclusion in  Phase  investment plan The off-grid projects ranked with
highest priority were solar irrigation and minigrids These projects were
selected because: ; The resource potential and number of sites is high ; Data on
the resource potential are good and IDCOL have identified  number of potential
projects in need of funding 70 ; The technologies are competitive with the cost
of off-grid diesel generation, especially in rural areas where the price of
diesel is likely to be higher than in urban areas Solar home systems were not
prioritized because there is  concerted effort to transition the program to
commercial financing, which seems close to being viable with the economies of
scale that have been achieved in Bangladesh Moreover, there is adequate funding
available at the moment for this program until full commercial financing is
available The use of solar irrigation and minigrids, in contrast, are not yet as
widespread, and still require considerable concessional financing or grant
funding to be financially viable Solar cook stoves, biomass and biogas projects
were reserved for Phase II of Bangladesh’ investment plan The improved cookstove
program of IDCOL has adequate financing at the moment with  target to achieve
one million ICS by Biomass and biogas projects were viewed as having sufficient
support, given the current understanding—still incomplete—of their potential
Such projects would be considered (as described in Section ) for the Phase II
investment plan 71 Table : Ranking of Renewable Technologies against Selection
Criteria Criteria Unexploited Market Potential High Readiness for implementation
Financial Viability RE Technologies Scalability Availability of sites Medium
Land is expensive to acquire, but potential for projects on publicly owned-land
or on land already owned by project developers Considerable developer interest;
schemes to promote utility scale solar still in development Utility-scale solar
High Only  few specific sites identified, but quality of solar resource data is
good High Competitive with diesel generation and likely future sources of
baseload power (imported coal and LNG)65 High High Medium Unknown developer
interest; loosely defined policy to promote solar development Grid- Connected
Substantial rooftop potential in Dhaka and Chittagong but may compete with other
uses Large resource potential throughout Bangladesh Rooftop (electric) Solar
Medium Low High Some pilots completed but limited data on potential uses
Substantial rooftop potential, but interest may be limited to industrial
customers So far, little uptake of solar thermal Solar water heating 65 Solar
water heating is typically used by industrial facilities to replace natural gas
used for heating 72 Criteria Unexploited Market Potential Readiness for
implementation Financial Viability RE Technologies Scalability Availability of
sites Medium High High Medium Most wind in coastal areas, which are prone to
flooding or have soil which makes construction difficult Capacity factors higher
than solar but wind speeds relatively low Some developer interest; no existing
schemes to promote utility-scale wind Comprehensive wind mapping to be completed
in 2015 Utility-scale wind Medium Low Some sites have been identified, and flows
measured, but no engineering site visits have been made High Low Substantial
social and environmental difficulties associated with siting in Bangladesh Very
little small hydropower development in Bangladesh to date Low-High Cost is
highly site dependent Resource potential appears to be limited; sites are low
head Hydropower Medium High High High Initial levelized cost estimates are among
the lowest Substantial potential in urban areas, but better schemes needed for
collection and management Technology well- developed globally but collection and
management critical Medium Some developer interest; no existing schemes to
support waste-to-energy Waste-to-Energy (Electricity) Sufficient resources in
major cities only 73 Criteria Unexploited Market Potential Low Readiness for
implementation Financial Viability RE Technologies Scalability Availability of
sites High Rising market demand since 2003; IDCOL has well developed program
Private sector is becoming active without IDCOL support IDCOL is aiming for
transition to commercial financing Medium Compares well to off-grid diesel;
sales of panels happening without IDCOL support High About one-third of rural
population does not have access to electricity Solar Home Systems (incl Pico
solar) High High Well-developed pipeline of potential customers Large solar
resource potential throughout Bangladesh High Large potential to replace solar
pumps Off-grid IDCOL has  well- developed program but needs additional funding
to reach targets Solar Pumps Medium Financially viable with subsidies only
Medium Medium Medium High Resource potential in off- grid areas is high, but SHS
systems may be sufficient for most residential needs IDCOL has  program for
micro and minigrids but existing projects have run into regulatory and
operational problems Many potential sites, lack of clear plans on transmission
expansion may limit future interest IDCOL has  pipeline of 21 projects with
investor interest Mini and Microgrids 74 Criteria Unexploited Market Potential
Readiness for implementation Medium Financial Viability RE Technologies
Scalability Availability of sites Medium Some projects in IDCOL’ pipeline
Limited data available on biomass potential; Study to be completed by SREDA in
2015 Medium Cost competitive with off-grid diesel but feedstock cost may be too
low Low Only large commercial operations have sufficient resource potential
IDCOL has an established track of funding both animal waste and rice husk
gasifiers Biomass and biogas (electric) Low Medium Medium High Market
penetration rate of ICS is still low; More than 30 million traditional
cookstoves could be replaced ICS market has been around for nearly 30 years and
is therefore one of the most mature in Bangladesh; IDCOL has established funding
program Biomass is most used source of fuel, but there are issues of resource
scarcity Constraints on biomass availability prevent long- term financial
viability High Improved Cookstoves 30+ partner organizations are using IDCOL
model Medium Medium High Moderate investor interest; IDCOL has established
funding program Medium Alternative to ICS; adopters tend to be on High upfront
cost, lower operating cost than ICS; uses Domestic Plants Biogas 40+ partner
organizations are using IDCOL model 75 Criteria Unexploited Market Potential
Readiness for implementation Financial Viability biomass more efficiently RE
Technologies Scalability Availability of sites larger cattle farms with higher
incomes66 Medium Unknown Unknown Technology is common, but unproven domestically
Unknown Waste (Natural Gas) to Energy Unknown Unknown developer interest Some
sites have to be identified 66 Kabir, Humayun “Growing popularity of small scale
biogas plants in Bangladesh” Volunteer research study submitted to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the UN, <  76  The prioritization exercise described
in Section  has led to the selection of three areas where Government will
request SREP support: Program Description ; Grid-connected renewable energy,
which includes utility-scale solar PV and grid-connected rooftop solar PV If
wind resources prove to be sufficient, and there is private sector interest, the
SREP funds could also be used for  grid-connected wind project ; Off-grid solar
PV, which includes solar irrigation, and mini/microgrids ; Advisory support in
preparing  municipal waste-to-energy project This section describes the projects
proposed for SREP support, the delivery models that may be used for each
project, the priority activities envisioned for each project, and the expected
co-benefits and environmental and social risks associated with the proposed
projects  Grid-Connected Renewable Energy SREP contributions would be used to
leverage financing for the development of 200 MW of utility-scale solar or grid-
connected rooftop solar in major urban areas67 The rapid decline in solar PV and
battery costs in recent years has made utility-scale solar PV more affordable
and more competitive with the other power generation options available to
Bangladesh, but few projects have gone forward SREP support would help catalyze
private investment in  first round of ground- or roof-mounted solar PV plants,
and show the potential for deploying solar PV on  commercial basis  Utility-
scale solar PV SREP contributions would be used to finance Bangladesh’ first
utility-scale solar plant, through  public private partnership (PPP) modality
The project would benefit from  mix of concessional finance from SREP and the
MDBs, as well as commercial finance from IFC and other private sector investors
The plant could be tendered through  reverse auction, under which Government
issues  tender for  given capacity (some number of MW) of new grid-connected
solar The tender may be site-specific or not  site-specific tender would
identify  specific site, on publicly-owned land, for construction of the new
plant or plants As an alternative to  site-specific tender, Government could
tender  request for  given capacity of solar, leaving it to the developers the
responsibility of acquiring the land This model would allow for bidding by
private sector developers who have their own land at the time of bidding, as
well as other developers who do not yet have land at the time of bidding There
is considerable flexibility on how responsibilities can be allocated under  PPP
contract, but contracts giving the design, build, operate, and finance (DBOF)
functions to the private sector are most common in such tenders These contracts
are typically known as Build-Own-Transfer (BOT) or Build-Own-Operate (BOO)
transactions Another 67 According to the respective SREP guideline, it is
anticipated that roughly $75m of the support provided by SREP will be in the
form of grant, and $25m will be in the form of concessional loans The Grid-
Connected Renewable Energy projects will be supported by  mix of SREP grant and
concessional loan, while the Off-grid solar PV projects will be supported by
SREP grant 77 alternative is to allow developers, outside of the tender process,
to submit proposals for private land Priority activities for utility-scale solar
The utility-scale solar PV project would include the following activities: ;
Resource assessment If  site-specific tender is used, or the plant is to be
publicly owned and operated, SREP grant funds could be used to fund more
detailed resource assessments, and identification of possible sites and possible
projects Existing data are generally acceptable for understanding the nature of
the resource and conducting  high-level financial analysis However, more
detailed resource assessment will be needed to characterize the solar resource
potential in the areas targeted for solar development in more detail Combined
with other ongoing resource assessment, this component would enable national
resource mapping, which will facilitate further potential investment in solar PV
; Investment in project or projects SREP support would be used to offer blended
finance to private bidders For example, roughly US$43 million of SREP funds
could be used to leverage US$ 100 million in IDA financing from the World Bank,
US$100 million in  partial risk guarantee (PRG) or similar instrument if needed,
and US$220 million in investment from IFC and other private sector investors for
utility-scale renewable energy plants (primarily solar but possibly also wind),
and rooftop solar  benefit of using IFC financing is that no sovereign
guarantees are required ; Advisory assistance IFC could assist through
transaction advisory or technical assistance in identifying project or business
models Transaction advisors could be hired to help government tender for the
projects identified in the feasibility studies; this could include assistance in
developing the framework for reverse auctions As described above, private
operators would be procured through competitive tender Bidders would be selected
based on technical and financial criteria, the financial criteria being the
level of tariff required or, alternatively, the level of concessional support
required Developers offering lower tariffs or requiring less concessional
support would receive higher scores In addition, technical assistance could be
used to analyze electricity and fossil fuel subsidies and cross-subsidies ;
Partial Risk Guarantees If desired by private bidders, SREP contributions could
also be used to provide guarantees to investors in utility-scale solar The best
form and purpose of the guarantee will need to be determined in parallel with
the feasibility studies and market sounding (part of the transaction advisory)
but guarantees could conceivably be used to reduce private investors risk
related to regulatory changes, or changes in macro-economic variables that are
difficult or unusually expensive to hedge (currency fluctuation, for example)
for government and the private sector  Rooftop Solar Two delivery models are
suitable for grid-connected rooftop solar in Bangladesh: 78 ; Private ownership
and operation Private developers could be incentivized to own and operate
rooftop solar arrays through two possible arrangements: – Feed-in-tariffs
Investors who already own rooftops (or who intend to build or buy them) could be
offered  fixed fee per kWh of solar production, with guaranteed offtake for the
life of the facilities This arrangement would likely be most suitable for
rooftop solar arrays on large privately-owned roof areas, such as industrial or
large commercial buildings Competitive tender for concession areas This is
similar to the PPP arrangement arrangement described above for utility-scale
solar PV projects In this model,  model,  private investor is granted the right
to develop  given site or aggregation of aggregation of sites The investor
agrees to make available  given capacity (MW), capacity (MW), and sell energy at
an agreed price per MWh on  “take or pay” basis or pay” basis The solar rooftop
programs in Gujarat and the Maldives present two present two possible PPP
arrangements using the concession area approach – Box  summarizes the successful
rooftop solar program in Gujarat and Box  describes the recently established
Maldives program ; Public ownership and operation The public sector could
install and operate rooftop solar arrays on public buildings, including
publicly-owned industries and other parastatals SREP contributions and MDB
financing could be used to invest in such projects 79 Box : Gujarat Rooftop
Solar Program In 2010, the Government of Gujarat launched its pilot solar
rooftop program in the city of Gandhinagar, the state’ capital The IFC, serving
as transaction advisor, helped Gujarat innovate   MW solar rooftop public-
private partnership (PPP) project to add power generating capacity, develop
contractual models for further solar projects, and demonstrate the technical and
economic feasibility of rooftop-based solar power Under the PPP model used to
finance Gujarat’ solar rooftop program, two private firms, Azure Power and
SunEdison, each won 25-year concessions for  MW solar rooftop projects The two
developers will install solar photovoltaic panels on the rooftops of public
buildings and private residences and connect them to the grid in Gandhinagar The
MW of power is saving over  million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions
annually Azure Power and SunEdison will lease rooftop space from government and
residential buildings The building owners will receive Rupees (Rs)  (or US$05)
for every unit of power generated The private operators are responsible for
installing the panels and connecting them to the grid, for which they will
receive  feed-in-tariff of Rs 21 ($18) per unit One of the greatest successes of
the pilot program has been its replicability for other cities in the state of
Gujarat The solar rooftop concept is being replicated in five other cities in
Gujarat  25-year concession to implement Gujarat’ second solar rooftop PPP was
signed in Vadodara in June IFC is helping implement similar PPP policy to
finance rooftop solar programs in four other cities in Gujarat – Bhavnagar,
Mehsana, Rajkot, and Surat Sources: “Replicating Success in Vadodara: Rooftop
Solar PPPs in India,” The World Bank Group, last modified September 25, 2014,
vadodara-rooftop-solar-ppps-in-india “Public-Private Partnership Stories India:
Gujarat Solar,” International Finance Corporation, last modified April 2012,
_India_GujaratSolarpdf?MOD=AJPERES Box : The Maldives Rooftop Solar Program The
Government of the Republic of Maldives’ (GoM) Accelerating Sustainable Private
Investment in Renewable Energy (ASPIRE) is an SREP and World Bank funded
initiative to support 20 MW of private sector investment in solar PV The first
sub-project under ASPIRE, launched in April, 2015, is seeking investors for  MW
of rooftop solar PV systems on identified public buildings in the Malé and
Hulhumalé islands The installation of the rooftop solar PV systems will be based
on  Design, Build, Finance, Own, Operate, Transfer (DBFOOT) model for 20 years
of ownership by the selected bidder Investors will be selected and awarded
according to the lowest bid tariff Once the bid is awarded, the investor will
sign  PPA with State Electric Company Limited (STELCO) to sell electricity
produced by the PV systems to STELCO at the specified rate offered by the
winning bidder The roof spaces will be leased through separate agreements
between the public entities that own the identified buildings and the selected
bidder Sources: “Bidding Documents for Design, Build, Finance, Own, Operate, and
Transfer of Grid-tied Solar Photovoltaic System in the Greater Malé Region”
Ministry of Environment and Energy, Republic of Maldives 12 April 80 Priority
activities for rooftop solar The rooftop solar PV projects would include the
following activities: ; Resource assessment As would be the case for utility-
scale solar PV, more detailed resource assessment is needed to confirm the
potential for rooftop solar PV, and lay foundation of further feasibility study
and project development As in Gujarat, an incremental approach may be used,
beginning with one city or an area within  city ; Transaction advisory The
private sector transaction advisory arms of the MDBs could fulfill the
transaction advisory role IFC fulfilled in Gujarat Alternatively, IFC could
provide support in identifying or structuring projects For example, IFC may
provide assistance on investment approaches for industries with potential for
large solar rooftop arrays Technical assistance could also be used to put in
place feed-in tariffs ; Investment in projects As for utility-scale solar, SREP
contributions would be used to leverage additional IDA financing, financing from
IFC and from the private sector Because of the highly distributed nature of some
solar PV sites (residential sites in particular), financing may need to be
distributed from  financial intermediary to partner organizations, following the
model IDCOL uses for other technologies  Utility-Scale Wind If the current wind
mapping exercise shows  sufficient resource, and if there is private sector
interest, SREP funding could be used to support wind projects The delivery model
and priority activities for utility-scale wind would be the same as for utility-
scale solar  Off-grid Solar PV Bangladesh has ample, and successful experience
with off-grid solar PV As described in Section , solar home systems, solar
irrigation pumps, and hybrid minigrids have already enjoyed considerable success
As described in Section , the dissemination of solar home systems program is
well advanced and has begun to attract substantial private sector interest
without the need for concessional financing There is still room, however, for
concessional financing to facilitate scale-up of the solar irrigation and mini-
grid programs SREP grant funding would therefore be used to leverage
concessional financing from the MDBs to support the scale-up of solar irrigation
technologies and hybrid minigrids Financing would be on-lent through the
Ministry of Finance and/or Bangladesh Bank to  financial intermediary The
financial intermediary would make grant funding or low-cost financing available
to investors, developers or end-users The models currently used for these
technologies are described in detail in Box  Similar models would be considered
to deliver projects supported by SREP 81 Box : Current Business Models for Solar
Irrigation and Minigrids IDCOL currently finances solar irrigation pumps and
hybrid minigrids in the following ways: ; Solar irrigation This program has two
business models: the fee for service model, which is currently in use, and the
proposed ownership model, which IDCOL is trying to introduce In the fee for
service model, pump operators (private sector sponsors) put in 20 percent of the
project cost as equity and IDCOL provides 40 percent of the cost as  grant and
the remaining 40 percent as credit at   percent interest rate, to be repaid over
period of  years The grant and credit funds are sourced from development
partners There are currently 17 sponsor organizations which have implemented
projects under this model These sponsors purchase TSC-approved equipment (pumps
and PV panels) from suppliers, who install the equipment and provide after-sale
service The sponsors own the pumps and sell water to farmers who pay an
irrigation charge Payments are collected by pump operators The ownership model
functions in  similar way for donors, IDCOL, and suppliers, but has POs (instead
of sponsors) who sell the pump on cash/credit to farmers Under this model
farmers pay 60 percent of what the pump would cost without  grant They make  20
percent down-payment and pay the rest in yearly installments for  years, at  15
percent interest rate ; Solar minigrid projects The projects are implemented
through sponsors, who contribute 20% of projects costs from their own sources
and receive 50% grant financing and 30% concessional financing from IDCOL The
concessional loans have   percent interest rate and are paid in quarterly
installments over  maximum of 10 years, with   year grace period The grants and
concessionary loans are sourced from the development partners Sponsors include
NGOs, micro-finance institutions and private sector companies Sponsors hire &
contractors, which provide & solutions, and EPC contractors, which purchase
equipment from suppliers and provide turnkey solutions The sponsors provide grid
connections to customers (including small shops, health centers, schools, etc),
who pay tariffs to the sponsors Priority activities The off-grid solar PV
projects would include: ; Investments in solar irrigation, or solar minigrids
Approximately 25 MW of new minigrid and 13 MW of solar PV pump capacity would be
installed Financing would be on-lent to  financial intermediary and then on-lent
to various partner organizations, developers, sponsors or end-users ; Technical
assistance in minigrid business models and regulation Minigrids have, as noted
in Section , experienced  number of challenges in Bangladesh, related to how
they are planned, regulated and operated as business SREP funding would be used,
as part of the project preparation to fund  study aimed at diagnosing the
problems experienced with minigrids in Bangladesh and identify possible
improvements to the regulatory environment or possible alternative business
models for the MDBs or IDCOL to consider  Waste to Energy Advisory Support SREP
support would be used to support the development of  municipal Waste-to- Energy
(WtE) project for Bangladesh As noted in Section , the challenges to WtE are
more managerial than technological The principal challenges to WtE project in
the 82 past have been primarily in the waste management functions required to
provide feedstock for  WtE plant Priority Activities SREP support would be used
for advisory support, which would identify the technical and commercial options
for developing  WtE plant The work would include the development of  feasibility
study and “business case” to consider options for ownership and operation Such
options would include  purely public arrangement (government owned and
operated); and various types of PPP arrangements (for example, management
contracts, leases, or concessions) Support could be provided by the World Bank
Program Implementation Arrangements SREDA will be responsible for the
coordination of Bangladesh’ SREP Program As the institution established by the
GoB to promote renewable energy in Bangladesh, SREDA has the functional
authority needed to coordinate the activities and ensure compliance with
monitoring and evaluation requirements of the development partners Implementing
agencies will submit quarterly/semi-annual reports to SREDA who will then submit
an annual report to the CIF Administration Unit through the World Bank The
detailed implementation arrangements will be worked out as the specific projects
are prepared and appraised by the respective MDBs Different components of the
SREP program may have different implementation agencies based on the specific
nature of the project (private or public-private partnership)  preliminary
implementation arrangement is described below, which may change depending on the
outcome of individual project appraisals  Grid-Connected Renewable Energy The
Grid-Connected Renewable Energy Project will be implemented by the World Bank
Group including the IFC For the IDA supported grid-tied project,  credit
line/refinancing facility will be established at IDCOL,  government-owned
infrastructure finance company IDCOL has been managing the successful renewable
energy program of the World Bank (IDA) since 2003 under the RERED program that
includes the flagship SHS program IDCOL is run by professional management under
effective oversight by  competent Board Following the successful SHS program,
IDCOL has been replicating the public-private partnership arrangement of the SHS
program for renewable energy based mini-grids and solar irrigation pumps as well
As  company, IDCOL is able to offer market based incentive package to its
management and staff IDCOL will be responsible for day-to-day management of the
component following Bank' fiduciary guidelines and procedures It will also be
responsible for the monitoring of the component' activities and results and
submission of quarterly/semi-annual reports to SREDA  Off-Grid Solar PV The Off-
Grid Solar PV Project will be implemented by ADB The technical and financial
business models for scaling up solar irrigation; mini-grids; and hybrid power
systems, as well as appropriate institutional arrangements will be developed
based on the experiences of existing programs, and harmonized with existing
successful business 83 models in the market (, IDCOL) The detailed
implementation arrangement for the SREP off-grid support to be managed by ADB
will be worked out during project appraisal, and coordinated with Power
Division, Rural Electrification Board of Bangladesh (REB) and SREDA  Development
Support for Waste to Energy The Waste-to-Energy advisory support would be
implemented through the World Bank Advisory services would be procured using
World Bank procurement rules and SREDA would act as the client of the advisors
SREDA could partner with other local implementation agencies, most likely this
would include IDCOL or Power Division with support from local university
renewable energy institutes such as the Institute of Renewable Energy of Dhaka
University (“IRE”) or the Center for Energy Studies at Bangladesh University of
Engineering and Technology (“CES”)  Utility-scale solar, off-grid solar PV,
utility-scale wind, and waste-to energy all have potential environmental,
social, and gender-related co-benefits Sections  to  describe potential co-
benefits from these technologies Environmental, Social and Gender-Related Co-
Benefits  Labor and working conditions ; Some opportunities for local employment
(paid and voluntary) and ‘on-the- job’ training in relation to the preparatory
works and deployment of these power sources (for example fixing of roof-mounted
solar PV panels; clearance of trees and vegetation; and, erection of electricity
distribution poles under skilled supervision) Depending on the business models,
this in sales, may also be maintenance and fee collection roles likely to
provide employment opportunities ; Opportunities for skills training,
educational events or mechanisms for encouraging jobs for women and marginalized
communities This could lead to poverty alleviation, increased average earnings
and increased GVA per capita ; Utility-scale projects, and some off-grid
projects offer the promise of transport infrastructure improvements, as better
roads will be needed to provide maintenance access to sites required for
utility-scale RE sites Transport infrastructure improvements result in secondary
benefits to local residents, businesses, and tourists ; Grid-connected projects
can improve the reliability of energy supply, benefitting  wide range of
economic sectors and encouraging new and existing businesses ;  waste-to-energy
project may also (depending on the plant design) offer heat as an important by-
product The heat could be used by industrial customers near the plant  Resource
efficiency and pollution prevention ; The grid-connected projects can improve
resource efficiency and prevent pollution by providing better reliability of
supply, reducing the use of back- 84 up diesel generators, and thus reducing the
NOx, SOx and carbon dioxide emissions resulting from diesel combustion ; The
off-grid technologies will reduce the use of traditional fuels, thereby reducing
air pollution from combustion of these fuels, but also reducing the river
sedimentation and marine and coastal pollution arising from deforestation ;
Utility scale solar, off-grid solar PV, and utility-scale wind have the
potential to reduce water resource usage compared to fossil fuel technologies,
which require the abstraction of water for cooling They also have the potential
to improve surface water quality compared to fossil fuel technologies, which
require discharge of treated effluents ; Waste-to-energy has an added benefit
from production, because by- products ( bottom-ash and residual metals) have
market value  Community health and safety ; Electricity from off-grid
technologies may partially replace the use of indigenous fuels, which produce
harmful indoor pollutants ; Potential to improve access to, or reliability of
electricity supply for hospitals, health centers, and clinics This is especially
true for hybrid minigrid projects where the combination of solar and diesel can
provide 24- hour electricity service suitable for refrigeration, sterilization,
and the offering of nighttime medical services ; Utility-scale solar can be
designed to alleviate the impacts of climate change events locally by
incorporating sustainable drainage into sites, as  way of mitigating flood risks
; Waste-to-energy can stimulate improvements in waste management and
recycling/disposal, sanitation and quality of life There is also potential to
improve community-level materials handling/ waste recycling facilities as part
of  waste management regime for solar PV (especially batteries and solar PV
panels)  Indigenous people and cultural heritage ; For utility-scale projects,
there would be the opportunity to use cultural heritage surveys, as part of the
ESIA process, to identify, document and protect culturally important
areas/artefacts for the long-term benefit of Affected Communities ; Off-grid
solar PV provides an opportunity for the empowerment of indigenous people, by
providing them with energy sources they did not have before, and allowing them
to manage or own energy sources  Gender ; Better quality lighting, and
additional hours of lighting have security benefits (especially when public
areas are lit) 85 ; Solar lighting has educational benefits, allowing for longer
hours of study in brighter light, while solar home systems allow more homes to
have  television and benefit from educational and health programming ; Women,
children, and the elderly benefit relatively more from lower use of traditional
fuels, as they are typically at risk of higher exposure to indoor pollutants
associated with burning of wood, dung or garbage ; Potential for operational
agreements for the renewable energy projects to target the encouragement of jobs
for women  Utility-scale solar, off-grid solar PV, utility-scale wind, and
waste-to energy all have environmental and social risks Many of these risks are
the same across the RE technologies, but each technology also has its own unique
risks to be considered Sections  to  describe some of the risk related to these
technologies Environmental and Social Risks  Labor and working conditions ; Lack
of locally trained professionals could give rise to the need for either local
professionals to travel overseas for training or for imported technical
expertise This could result in the displacement of the local population, as well
as an increased cost-of-living ; Unsafe or unhealthy working conditions and poor
health of workers can arise if measures are not in place to promote safe and
healthy working conditions, especially for vulnerable categories of workers such
as children, workers engaged by third parties and workers in the supply chain ;
For waste-to-energy and utility-scale projects, transportation of people and
equipment might impact traffic patterns during construction near the project
site  Resource efficiency and pollution prevention ; Potential for air emissions
during the construction stage (vehicle emissions, particulate matter and dust),
due to material transportation and on-site plant movements ; Waste-to-energy
plants cause air quality emissions from flue gas (including CO2, sulphur
dioxide, nitrogen oxide and nitrogen dioxide amongst many others) These
emissions can give rise to risks of acidification of soils and water bodies ;
Utility-scale solar and solar PV have  risk of pollution from the generation,
handling and disposal of waste during construction, maintenance and
decommissioning This is  special risk for solar PV because there may be
hazardous materials in solar PV panels (such as gallium arsenide, copper-
indium-gallium-diselenide and cadmium-telluride) Lead-sulfate dust from lead-
acid batteries, and mercury from compact florescent lighting are also pollution
risks 86 ; Off-grid solar PV, and utility-scale projects have  risk of polluting
water bodies due to potential erosion and mobilization of sediments by the
construction of the plant and inappropriate storage of polluting materials
Community health, safety and security ; Risk of detrimental health effects on
local communities through dust and other particulate matter during construction
; Waste-to-energy health concerns include odor, litter, flies/vermin/birds and
noise emissions ; Unauthorized access to utility-scale structures is  safety
concern (for example, unauthorized climbing of turbine structures) ; Risk of
damage to the RE infrastructure due to increased frequency and severity of
floods, tropical storms, storm surges and sea level rise associated with climate
change ; Utility-scale solar and minigrids have the potential for increased
flood risk in high-risk flood areas due to clearing of vegetation for the
generation plant, materials holding and storage areas ; Utility-scale projects
and minigrids may cause disturbances to communities, arising from construction
(including vibration, blasting, clearing and grading site), operation and
decommissioning such as noise, traffic, vibration, odor, shadow flicker and
blade glint ; Utility-scale wind has the risk of electromagnetic interference
with aviation radar and telecommunication systems (including microwave, radio
and television)68  Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement ; Utility-scale
projects and off-grid solar PV have the potential risk of sunk cost in
infrastructure if poorly planned and located in high-risk flood areas or in the
path of sea level rise ; Utility-scale projects and waste-to-energy present
possible conflicts with land owners as  result of the need for loss of existing
land (such as temporary or permanent loss of farmers’ croplands), resettlement
or displacement of other economic activities In particular, conflict could arise
in areas of community land ownership, where cultural sensitivities and landowner
negotiations can be particularly difficult  Biodiversity conservation and
sustainable management of living natural resources ; Utility-scale projects and
waste-to-energy have the potential for construction works and operational
equipment to result in the loss of habitat, habitat fragmentation and impacts on
ecosystem services 68 As cited in the World Bank’ Environmental, Health and
Safety Guidelines for wind Energy:  approach/risk+management/ehsguidelines 87 ;
Utility-scale projects have the risk of soil erosion and degradation as  result
of stripping the working area for infrastructure during construction ; Utility-
scale solar could cause ecological impacts in local water bodies as  result of
sediment deposition from storm water runoff ; Utility-scale wind could impact
populations of bird species due to strikes associated with turbines or
transmission lines, and could impact bats due to vibration and noise ; Utility-
scale wind has  risk of harm to fauna arising from partial decommissioning, and
leaving residual infrastructure or polluting materials in place ; Utility-scale
wind construction and maintenance activities for land grading, in-ground
equipment could cause disturbances of foundations and contaminated soils and
sediments  Indigenous peoples and cultural heritage ; Ethnic disputes over
placement of energy generating equipment and ancillary infrastructure ;
Potential loss or damage to cultural and natural sites due to construction or
operation of schemes, including nationally and regionally registered areas,
unknown or unregistered cultural heritage sites and intangible cultural and
heritage assets ; Visual impacts of RE generation infrastructure upon the
landscape, with potential impacts on the scenic value of Reserves, Sanctuaries
and National Parks (For example, the stack of  waste-to-energy plant)  Other
cross-cutting topics ; Utility-scale projects have  risk of pollution to water
bodies (including surface water and groundwater supplies) arising from
construction activities ; Off-grid solar PV has  risk of sulfate contamination
in surrounding lands and water bodies (including groundwater) due to improper
disposal and recycling of lead-acid storage batteries ; Waste-to-energy has
risk to water resource availability, surface water quality and aquatic ecology
(likely abstraction and cooling water discharge requirement) ; Utility-scale
projects and minigrids have  risk of localized geological damage as  result of
creating foundations for RE generation infrastructure and laying transmission
networks  Table  presents  plan for financing the projects described in Section
It shows the proposed credits and grants from SREP as well as estimates of the
amounts anticipated from MDBs and the private sector Financing Plan and
Instruments 88 As the table shows, roughly US$ 75 million of SREP funding is
expected to catalyse over eight times as much investment, most of it from the
private sector (as equity or debt), and the public sector lending windows of the
MDBs The exact financing modalities will be determined at the time of appraisal,
but it is expected that: ; Roughly US$45 million of SREP funding would be used
to leverage US$ 100 million in IDA financing from the World Bank, US$100 million
in  PRG or similar instrument if required, $30m of IFC investment, and US$190
million in investment from other private sector investors for utility-scale
renewable energy plants (primarily solar but possibly also wind), and rooftop
solar ; Roughly US$ 95 million of SREP grant funding would be used to leverage
US$ 140 million in concessional financing from ADB for solar irrigation and
hybrid minigrid projects ; The World Bank would provide support for an
assessment of technical and commercial feasibility of  municipal waste-to-energy
project The Government of Bangladesh will contribute by facilitating fiscal
incentives for services associated with the financing plan 89 Table : Financing
Plan—Phase  MDB Respon- sible Government of Bangladesh Private Sector (Equity or
Debt) SREP Project SREP MDBs Total Grid-Connected Renewables Investment in
utility-scale solar and wind, and rooftop solar Investment in utility-scale
solar and wind, and rooftop solar Resource assessment Technical assistance or
transaction advisory Subtotal: Grid-connected renewables Off-grid solar PV
Investment in mini-grids Investment in solar irrigation Project preparation
Subtotal: Off-grid solar PV Development support for Waste-to-Energy Assessment
of technical and commercial feasibility for WtE plant Subtotal: Development
support for Waste-to-Energy Investment Plan Preparation Grant Grand Total SREP
Leverage (Million US$) 00* 00 WB IFC WB IFC 00 00 95 50 45 20 25 00 00 20 25 95
50 90 45 00 (Million US$) 00 00 00 00 00 95 95 75 60 75 60 95 30 ADB 35 00
(Million US$) 00 30 30 30 00 30 30 30 80 WB 00 00 00 80 00 00  Notes: All
amounts in this table are preliminary estimates and are subject to availability
of funds *Roughly $100 million of this amount could be IDA financing and $100
million could be in the form of  PRG or similar guarantee instrument The
guarantee instrument will be used only if required by private sector bidders 90
As described in Section , the investments associated with the SREP investment
plan represent the first phase of two-phase investment program planned by
Government Support for Phase II will be sought from the Green Climate Fund (GCF)
The second phase will include  continuation of the grid-connected renewable
energy projects, clean cookstoves program, and the waste-to-energy project
launched as part of Phase , with SREP assistance Table  shows financing plan for
Phase II of Bangladesh’ investment plan The numbers are meant for the purposes
of rough illustration only, and do not imply any commitment made by GCF, the
Government of Bangladesh, the MDBs or any other parties More specifically, the
Phase  program would include: ; Grid-Connected Renewables II This project will
be an expanded version of the project from Phase  with the aim of supporting the
GoB’ RE Development Targets for 2021 (see Section ) The financing plan for this
project includes more than US$  billion in funds for: – Utility-scale solar The
plan for Phase  would be to achieve the goal of having ,221 MW of utility-scale
solar by 2021 through the financing of the remaining target MWs needed after
Phase  The focus in this phase would be to reduce the role played by MDBs and
increase private sector activity – Utility-scale wind  major emphasis of Phase
would be to kick-start the expansion of utility-scale wind MDBs would provide
the majority of financing in order to support wind similar to how utility-scale
solar would be supported in Phase  The plan provides total financing sufficient
to achieve the 637 MW technical potential for utility-scale wind found in
Section  This installed capacity is nearly half of the GoB’ 2021 target –
Rooftop solar The target for 2021 is to have 48 MW of rooftop solar The plan for
Phase  is for MDB support any remaining MWs needed to achieve the target and
have an additional 110 MW (approximately 25 percent of technical potential found
in Section ) in private sector investment – Small hydropower GoB has  target to
install  MW in small hydropower by The plan includes sufficient financing to
cover installation of - small HPPs at sites with - MW in technical potential ;
Clean Cookstoves The clean cookstove project includes US$ million in funds for
the installation of ICS and biogas plants Existing MDB programs have sufficient
funds for these technologies through The financing plan in this project would
aim to continue these existing programs in order to support the national goals
of installing 30,000 million ICS and 100,000 biogas plants ICS support would be
provided through the provision of low cost financing to the POs that are
installing ICS Biogas plants would be supported through  mix of capital buy down
grants and concessional 91 grants In total, this Phase  project would cover the
financing of approximately 20 million ICS and 65,000 biogas plants ; Waste to
Energy Program This project supports the GoB’ goals to have the installed
capacity to generate 40 MW from municipal waste;  MW from biomass; and  MW from
biogas by The municipal waste to energy project would be developed based on the
results of the feasibility study in Phase  The biomass and biogas financing plan
follows the existing models to use  mix of grants, concessional loans, and
private equity for these projects 92 Table : Financing Plan—Phase  GCF or others
Government of Bangladesh Private Sector (Debt or Equity) SREP Project MDBs Total
Grid-Connected Renewables II (Million US$) Investment in utility-scale solar
Investment in utility-scale wind Investment in rooftop solar  Investment in
small hydro power    Project preparation (including feasibility studies)
Subtotal: Grid-connected renewables Clean Cookstove (Million US$) Investment in
cookstoves  Investment in biogas plants  Financing for POs Subtotal: Clean
Cookstove Waste to Energy Program Investments in Municipal Waste-to-Energy
(Million US$) 000 Investments in Biomass to Electricity    000 Investments in
Biogas to Electricity Subtotal: Waste to Power   000 Grand Total ,93  The
Investment Plan developed for Bangladesh is responsive to all of the SREP
criteria Table  summarizes how each of the projects responds to SREP Criteria
Responsiveness to SREP Criteria Table : Summary of Projects’ Responsiveness to
SREP Criteria Criteria Grid-connected solar Grid-connected wind Off-grid solar
PV WtE Increased installed capacity from renewable energy sources SREP resources
would be used to finance the development of approximately 200 MW in utility-
scale solar PV and grid- connected rooftop PV in major urban areas SREP
resources could be used to finance the development of utility-scale wind via
private investment (through  feed-in tariff or reverse auctions) or public
investment (via on-lending from MoF) SREP resources could be used to finance the
development of  MW of solar irrigation (through  fee-for-service or an ownership
model) and 25 MW of minigrids (through sponsors, grant financing and
concessional financing) SREP support could be used to support the development of
municipal WtE schemes, through financing  feasibility study and business case,
providing viability-gap funding and lending to (or investment in) the WtE PPP
company Increased access to energy through renewable energy sources Microgrids
can provide groups of up to 1000 customers with close to 24 hr power services
and solar irrigation pumps can offer surrounding residents access to electricity
when not being used for pumping purposes 94 Criteria Grid-connected solar Grid-
connected wind Off-grid solar PV WtE Low Emission Development Grid-connected
solar produces no emissions and will displace diesel powered generation Grid-
connected wind produces no emissions and will displace diesel powered generation
Off-grid solar produces no emissions and will displace kerosene currently used
by households for lighting and diesel currently used for existing water pumps
WtE leads to air quality emissions from flue gas (including CO2, sulphur
dioxide, nitrogen oxide and nitrogen dioxide among many others) but will
displace diesel powered generation Affordability and competitiveness of
renewable resources The rapid decline in solar PV and battery costs in recent
years has made utility-scale solar more affordable and more competitive with
diesel generation and likely future sources of baseload power (, imported coal
and LNG) Grid-connected wind is competitive with diesel generation and likely
future sources of baseload power (, imported coal and LNG) Off-grid solar could
provide power for irrigation at cheaper rates than diesel, though only
replacement of large diesel pumps on - crop land are considered viable
Concessional financing makes minigrids and solar irrigation competitive with
diesel generation The cost of WtE schemes depend on the introduction of
efficient waste collection processes With efficient collection, WtE is
competitive with diesel and coal Productive use of energy Grid-connected
technologies increase access to energy supply and could lead to an increase in
new businesses, supplying new development and workforce, increasing local tax
returns and diversifying local business base Off-grid solar can lead to an
increase in new businesses, supplying new development and workforce, increasing
local tax returns and diversifying the local business base Children’ education
benefits from lighting that allows them to study longer in brighter light WtE
provides more reliable electric power supply, and can also provide heat energy
to local businesses if so designed By-products of WtE (, bottom-ash and residual
metals) have market value 95 Criteria Grid-connected solar Grid-connected wind
Off-grid solar PV WtE Economic, social and environmental development impact The
development of these projects has  number of economic, social and environmental
benefits, which are described in detail for each technology in Section  Economic
and financial viability The supply curves shown in Section  confirm that grid-
connected solar, with either concessional or private financing, is considerably
lower cost than diesel or coal generation The supply curves shown in Section
confirm that grid- connected wind (including high speed and low speed wind farms
and wind-solar hybrids), with either concessional or private financing, is
considerably lower cost than diesel or coal generation The supply curves shown
in Section  confirm that off- grid solar is financially viable with concessional
financing The supply curves shown in Section  confirm that WtE, with either
concessional or private financing, is low cost compared to diesel and coal
generation Leveraging of additional resources Investments from the private
sector, MDBs, and government are estimated to leverage  times the amount
contributed by SREP Gender Grid-connected technologies create the potential for
skills training and education for the empowerment of women WtE could provide
vocational skills training and educational opportunities which could benefit
women Off-grid solar can lead to skills training and education, and the
empowerment of women through better lighting and longer hours of electricity and
associated security benefits at night Off-grid solar also reduces air pollution
compared to use of fossil fuel technologies, improving respiratory health in
women 96 Criteria Grid-connected solar Grid-connected wind Off-grid solar PV WtE
There are  number of co-benefits associated with each technology These are
described in more detail in Section  Co-benefits of renewable energy scale-up 97
Implementation Potential with Risk Assessment The implementation risk of the IP
in Bangladesh is moderate The main risks are regulatory and financial For the
on-grid projects, it is not yet clear how rights to own and operate grid-
connected RE plants will be awarded and how the investors and operators will be
remunerated The financial risks are related to the fact that end-user tariffs
are still well below the cost of supply, meaning that fiscal subsidies are
required to cover the difference between utility revenue and the cost at which
private bidder would be willing to sell power to the grid For the off-grid
project, the biggest risk is one of stranded assets There is  risk that
transmission expansion or customer anticipation of grid expansion, will stifle
interest in investment in off-grid technologies, as rural areas await
electricity connections instead of investing in their own sources of supply Off-
grid RE also requires  large upfront investment which, while on  levelized basis
may be cheaper than using  diesel generator, can require substantial upfront
payments Most of these risks can be mitigated by project preparation, as can
environmental and social risks The GoB has well-established processes for
mitigating social and environmental issues associated with the proposed
projects, and ensuring that these be managed in accordance with World Bank
and/or ADB safeguard requirements as applicable Legislation for environmental
impact assessments (EIAs) in Bangladesh is provided by the Environmental Policy
(1992), Environmental Conservation Act (ECA, 1995) and the Environmental
Conservation Rules (ECR, 1997) The ECA requires all industrial units and
projects to receive Environmental Clearance Certificates (ECCs) from the
Department of Environment The ECR describes the processes and requirements for
obtaining ECCs, and classifies projects into four categories of environmental
impact and location: Green, Orange , Orange  and Red Projects with low
environmental impact are issued  Green ECC All other projects must receive  site
clearance certificate before obtaining an ECC Applications for Orange  and Red
projects must be accompanied by  feasibility report on initial environmental
examination, EIA and an environmental management plan Once granted, the ECC must
be renewed every three years for Green projects, and every year for other
categories Figure  below lays out the procedure for obtaining an ECC 98 Figure :
Procedure for Obtaining Environmental Clearance Certificates Table  describes
the principal risks associated with Bangladesh’ IP, describes how to mitigate
those risks, and evaluates the residual level of risk after the proposed
mitigation measures are implemented Table : Risk Assessment of the SREP
Programme in Bangladesh Residual Risk Risk Description Mitigation Moderate and
Legal regulatory risks Project preparation grant from SREP will include TA for
advice on and procurement modalities (where appropriate, for example, industrial
rooftops) feed-in tariffs gaps  number of inconsistencies in identified
regulatory framework and have been Bangladesh’ The grid-connected RE projects
the could be affected by absence of  clear policy on remuneration for utility-
scale RE or rooftop solar, and the absence of  standardized process for entering
into PPP arrangements transaction provide IFC will advisory services to ensure
high quality of bidding documents and tender process which will serve as the
basis for future power sector PPPs The risks to the waste-to-energy the project
are project technical assistance only limited as involves The principal risks to
the off-grid risk of projects are expansion of the transmission network into
areas which have Project preparation grant from SREP will provide TA (using
international experience) on best the 99 Risk Description Mitigation Residual
Risk for models coordinating grid expansion with uptake of off-grid technologies
made investments in off-grid technologies; stranding those investments  related
risk is the perception of customers in off-grid areas that the grid will expand
to their areas, and their consequent reluctance to invest in off-grid
technologies Institutional capacity risks As noted above, IFC will provide
transaction advisory services to ensure that Government receives favourable
terms from private investors Moderate The Government of Bangladesh, through
BPDB, has extensive experience negotiating power purchase agreements for grid-
connected diesel However, the commercial terms of these PPAs have not
necessarily been as advantageous to Bangladesh as they could have been For pay”
“take example private arrangements with to operators non- economic dispatch in
which lower cost, government-owned gas plants sit idle while higher- cost
privately-owned diesel plants run or leads Where possible, SREP funds will be
disbursed through the financial intermediaries that have proven track records
investing in off-grid renewable energy in Bangladesh The Government of
Bangladesh and several of its financial intermediaries have extensive with
experience off-grid technologies The business models are well-known and have
proven successful Technology risks Most of the proposed projects relate to
technologies that are well-known globally Many of the technologies (especially
the off-grid technologies) are also well-known in Bangladesh Project preparation
will include feasibility studies with detailed technical specifications Low
Environment al risks risks include Environmental to pollution natural
biodiversity resource management Pollution could be  serious risk for both solar
and waste-to- energy projects, while pollution remains  lesser issue for
utility- scale wind projects Utility-scale projects (both solar and wind)
present environmental risks in to form of disruption the Moderate Site-specific
environmental impact assessments (or project specific, in the case of the
individual solar systems) will be carried out for all projects implemented under
SREP These assessments will ensure that the comply with Government policies as
well as World Bank and/or ADB safeguards requirements as applicable and threats
and projects 100 Residual Risk Risk Description Mitigation and biodiversity
natural resource management, with utility-scale wind presenting the widest range
of issues Moderate social Site-specific impact assessments will be carried out
for all projects implemented under SREP These assessments will ensure that the
projects comply with Government policies as well as World Bank and/or ADB
safeguards as applicable In relation to hydro and microgrid projects where this
risk is considered high, Free, Prior and Informed (FPIC) among other social
assessment and consultation methodologies will be used to address any issues of
land community disputes Strong ownership and buy in will be sought to mitigate
these risks Social risks Social risks include the threat of conditions, poor
working community health, safety and security, land acquisition/resettlement,
and risks to indigenous peoples and their cultural heritage Poor working
conditions could be  problem with any of the technologies selected Community
health, safety and security also impacts overarching concerns, but have for
particular utility-scale and minigrids Challenges arising land from the
necessity of voluntary and acquisition resettlement could likely arise for
utility-scale and waste-to- energy Each projects technology also poses risks to
the indigenous peoples of Bangladesh and their cultural heritage requirements
consultation are significance projects Financial risks Moderate The off-taker,
BPDB, receives subsidies from GoB and in 15 years has never missed  payment to
power producers For grid-connected projects, GoB will consider working with MDBs
to offer guarantees which cover regulatory risk (tariffs not being increased as
agreed) or payment risk However, the end-user tariff for grid-connected
generation is well-below the cost of supply, meaning that subsidies from GoB
will need to continue The business model envisioned for technologies will the
off-grid provide CAPEX subsidies or low cost financing which will make the
technologies affordable The upfront capital cost of off- grid RE options is
difficult for many rural users to afford 101  Monitoring and Evaluation The
investments proposed in this plan has the potential to transform grid-connected
electricity generation in Bangladesh, moving the country from  dependence on
emergency, thermal generation to utility-scale solar, wind, and waste-to-energy
It would also expand the use of promising off-grid technologies for households
and agriculture, building on the success of existing programs  monitoring and
evaluation (&) system will be established by the Government, in cooperation with
the MDBs and other donor partners, for the purpose of tracking and reporting on
progress in reaching SREP impacts and outcomes The & framework will be
coordinated by SREDA Table  summarizes the proposed monitoring and evaluation
(&) framework for Bangladesh’ SREP IP Table : Results Framework for the SREP
Programme in Bangladesh Result Indicators Baseline (2014) Targets (2020) Means
of Verification SREP Transformative Impact Indicators Support low carbon
development pathways by reducing energy poverty and/or increasing energy
security 74% 95% Percentage of total households with access to electricity69
SREDA/SREP Project’ & system 66% 100% Percentage of off- grid households with
access to electricity* SREDA/SREP Project’ & system 26% % Annual electricity
output from RE70 SREDA/SREP Project’ & system  Avoided CO2 emissions 225,000
tons per year SREDA/SREP Project’ & system SREP Outcomes  Increased supply of
renewable energy Increased annual electricity output (GWh) as  result of SREP
interventions 332 GWh, including 289 GWh from grid-connected solar and 43 GWh
from off-grid solar SREDA/SREP Project’ & system 69 The Revised SREP results
framework (2012) says that this indicator should be  “National measure of
‘energy poverty’ such as the Multi-dimensional Energy Poverty Index (MEPI), or
some equivalent mutually agreed measure” Energy poverty is indeed  multi-
dimensional problem which includes problems associated with  lack of access to
sufficient energy supply,  lack of access to clean energy, and  lack of access
to affordable energy The case in Bangladesh is the lack of adequate supply of
electricity for those connected to the grid, as well as lack of access to
electricity for off-grid areas where even solar home systems have not reached
Access indicators are therefore used to measure energy poverty  more robust
survey for multi-tier access is currently being planned under  World Bank-
supported project 70 Grid-connected generation mix 102  Increased access to
modern energy services Number of women and men, businesses and community
services benefiting from improved access to electricity and fuels as  result of
SREP interventions 50,000 men, women, connected through off-grid projects
SREDA/SREP Project’ & system   New and additional resources for renewable energy
projects Leverage factor: US$ financing from other sources compared to SREP
funding SREP Project’ & system 103 Appendix : Assessment of Bangladesh’
Absorptive Capacity This appendix contains an assessment of Bangladesh’ ability
to absorb the financing envisioned as part of Phase  of the investment plan and
the ability of relevant government agencies to implement the projects identified
Debt Sustainability The amount of Bangladesh' debt has increased over time, but
its debt-to-GDP ratio has decreased Economic expansion and consistent annual
growth has put Bangladesh at  low risk of debt distress, with  debt-to-GDP ratio
below the percent regional average71 According to recent International Monetary
Fund (IMF) analysis, when subject to multiple macroeconomic shocks, there is  50
percent chance that Bangladesh' debt- to-GDP ratio would stay between 36 and 40
percent (and thus  50 percent chance the debt-to GDP ratio would be either above
40 percent or below 36 percent) Even if Bangladesh experienced  combination of
negative macro-economic shocks, with no positive macroeconomic shocks, the debt-
to-GDP ratio would still remain below 42 percent Appendix Figure : shows
Bangladesh' recent debt-to-GDP ratios, along with IMF projections up to the year
Appendix Figure : IMF Debt to GDP Projections,  As of the third quarter of FY
2014, the composition of Bangladesh' public debt was 65 percent external and 35
percent domestic (see Appendix Figure )72 According to the Ministry of Finance,
the cost of external debt has been low for Bangladesh, since most of this debt
is in the form of concessional loans from IDA, ADB and Japan Recently, external
borrowing has been increasing, partially due to Bangladesh receiving  smaller
share of grant aid in the external aid package These external loans have an
average 10-year grace period and an average 20 year repayment period73 71
Leandro Medina “Assessing Fiscal Risks in Bangladesh” IMF (2015) 72 World Bank
"Quarterly Public Sector Debt" (2015) 73 Bangladesh Ministry of Finance "Budget
Financing and Debt Management" (2008) 104 Appendix Figure  shows Bangladesh'
funding sources for public external debt, with multilateral donors offering the
majority of funding Appendix Figure : Composition of Public Debt () Appendix
Figure : Public External Debt by Funding Source (2013) Source: World Bank
Quarterly Public Sector Source: World Bank International Debt Statistics Debt
(2015) (2015) The Ministry of Finance acknowledges  concern that interest rate
payments are  "substantial burden on the budget" Appendix Figure  illustrates
projection of external debt service payments, showing both principal and
interest payments By continuing its efforts to maximize its share of grant aid
and seek low interest concessional loans (such as those provided by SREP and as
leverage from MDBs), Bangladesh can minimize the burden that interest rates have
on the budget, while still obtaining the financing needed to meet development
goals Appendix Figure : External Debt Service Payments () Source: World Bank
International Debt Statistics (2015) Note: Exports and income assumed to grow %
annually from 2014 to 2020 105 In accordance with the National Strategy for
Accelerated Poverty Reduction (NSAPR), the Bangladesh Ministry of Finance has
taken on debt management reform measures, and has developed strategies for
public debt management74 This strategy includes pursuing stable and low-cost
financing, developing  well-functioning government securities market, and
minimizing the risks involved with debt management, in order to promote debt
sustainability in the medium-term  Financing will be channelled through the
Economic Relations Division (ERD) of the Ministry of Finance and/or Bangladesh
Bank SREDA will be the principal coordinating agency for the projects, and will
be responsible for applying the monitoring and evaluation framework outlined in
Section  These institutions have extensive experience implementing and
coordinating programs financed by the MDBs Implementing Agency Capacity  number
of non-bank financial intermediaries (NBFIs) may be involved in various aspects
of the investment program75 It is expected that the financial intermediary most
appropriate for each investment will be selected in conjunction with the MDBs
responsible for each particular project The financial intermediaries which may
be involved in various aspects of this investment plan include: ; The
Infrastructure Development Company (IDCOL), described in earlier sections IDCOL
was established in 1997 as an implementing agency which on-lends grants and
loans to partner organizations who in turn procure, install, and often times
refinance loans to households It has established  track record in managing donor
funds successfully in off-grid renewable energy ; The Bangladesh Infrastructure
Finance Fund Limited (BIFFL), incorporated on 21 March 2011 as  public limited
company with capital of roughly US$200 million The fund is licensed by
Bangladesh Bank to operate as an NBFI under the Financial Institutions Act,
BIFFL’ objective is to provide predominantly long-term financing for PPP
projects through the issuance of bonds, debt instruments, and equity offerings ;
Investment Promotion and Financing Facility (IPFF) IPFF is  financing facility
at Bangladesh Bank IPFF finances PPP projects Its objective is to accelerate
private sector-led growth by providing term financing for infrastructure
development and promoting domestic infrastructure finance capacity IPFF can work
through  range of participating NBFI’ including, for Infrastructure Development
Finance example, Company, Ltd) IIFDC is  participating non-bank financial
institution of IPFF, with the objectives are to finance investments in
infrastructure and industrial sector IFDC (Industrial and 74 Bangladesh Ministry
of Finance "Budget Financing and Debt Management" (2008) 75 As of December 2012,
48 commercial banks and 28 Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs) are active
in the financial sector 106 Appendix Table  compares the financial
intermediaries described above in terms of their experience as implementing
agencies for MDB financing, as well as their experience in the energy sector
Appendix Table : Comparison of Financial Intermediaries NBFI Relevant Experience
IDCOL As described in Section , IDCOL has extensive experience appraising and
on- lending to MDB financing to energy sector projects, including off-grid RE
projects and traditional, thermal power plant projects (IDCOL was instrumental
in financing for the Meghnaghat and Haripur combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT)
projects BIFFL BIFFL has not yet financed any projects in the power sector or
worked as an intermediary for MDB financing IPFF Roughly US$ 60 million of power
sector projects have been financed through IPFF, adding 178 MW of electricity to
the national grid An additional $300 million in MDB financing has been allocated
for on-lending in the 2nd Phase of IPFF, extending the project tenure up to 31
December Direct on-lending to commercial banks may also be an alternative to
working through NBFIs, but commercial banks in Bangladesh are typically
conservative in their lending because of  lack of capacity for appraisals and
risk assessment, and, to some extent, regulatory requirements for liquidity
Lending to RE projects may look risky in comparison to their traditional markets
in corporate and consumer lending 107 Appendix : Project Concept Briefs  Grid-
Connected Solar PROBLEM STATEMENT  Power supply shortages continue to be
problem in Bangladesh The country’ increased urban population and sustained
economic growth has led to an 18 percent increase in peak electricity demand
from 2011 to Load shedding is common from April to September, when demand peaks
at over ,000 MW Government has minimized energy shortages by contracting with
expensive liquid fuel-run rental power plants (RPPs) as  short term solution
while awarding contracts for several large independent power plants (IPPs) run
on coal and natural gas New capacity from RPPs has improved power supply in
recent years— maximum load shed has declined since May 2012, and total load shed
days have decreased However, the large and relatively cheaper base load IPPs
have not come into operation in time, with many of them significantly delayed
due to sponsors’ inability to reach financial closure While RPPs have added much
needed capacity, they do not represent  sustainable long-term solution to energy
shortfalls Sustained GDP growth of six percent per year could lead to an
increase in annual demand of 62 percent by 2020 and 207 percent by If power
demand continues to grow at the projected rate, an average of 829 MW per year
needs to be installed over the next 15 years to meet peak demand in  Bangladesh
also faces challenges in the form of depletion of natural gas, the primary fuel
for power generation It has been estimated that Bangladesh’ natural gas reserves
will be depleted before Declining indigenous resources and increasing demand has
caused Bangladesh to increasingly depend on imported fuel oil The increase in
fuel oil consumption has been driven by BPDB reliance on fuel oil based RPPs to
mitigate energy shortages From 2009 to 2015, the share of oil-fired electricity
has increased from  to 20 percent (correspondingly reducing the share of natural
gas for power generation) This increase in oil fired electricity contributed to
the fuel cost per kWh generated going up from  to 42 taka/kWh (US$ 014 to US$
04) over the same period This leaves Bangladesh’ energy sector vulnerable to oil
price shocks in the international market PROJECT OBJECTIVE  The project aims to
increase energy reliability and security by developing  market for grid-
connected renewable energy The objective of this project is to support the
Government of Bangladesh overcome key barriers that prevent the growth and
expansion of the utility-scale renewable energy market in Bangladesh The
projects consists of three components: ; Component  involves investments in
utility-scale solar and wind, as well as rooftop solar SREP contributions would
be used to leverage additional IDA financing, financing from IFC and from the
private sector to achieve financial closure This component will be implemented
in two ways: () by the World Bank establishing  credit line or refinancing
facility at IDCOL,  government- owned infrastructure finance company, to support
winning bidders of the 108 competitive tenders; and () by IFC in the form of
direct investment in early/first private sector utility-scale RE plants In
addition, the World Bank would offer partial risk guarantees to reduce risks
that private sector investors face, if there is  need from private sector
bidders ; Component  involves resource assessment SREP grant funds could be used
to fund more detailed resource assessments, and identification of possible sites
and possible projects For utility-scale solar, more detailed resource assessment
than existing data will be needed to characterize the solar resource potential
in the areas targeted for solar development For rooftop solar,  more detailed
mapping exercise is needed to determine all the suitable rooftops in the largest
urban areas Combined with other ongoing resource assessment, this component
would enable national resource mapping, which will facilitate further potential
investment in solar PV If the current wind mapping exercise shows sufficient
resource potential, and if there is private sector interest, SREP funding could
be used to support wind projects The delivery model and priority activities for
utility-scale wind would be the same as for utility-scale solar ; Component
involves transaction advisory for tendering projects identified by feasibility
studies IFC will support transaction advisory on structuring of the PPP
arrangement under which private operators would be selected Competitive tenders
would be used to procure private operators, and the bidders would be selected
based on technical eligibility and financial criteria The financial criteria
being the level of tariff required, or, alternatively, the level of concessional
support required Since financial closure of projects is  challenge in
Bangladesh, advisory work will include assisting the implementing agencies in
meeting their respective conditions precedent outlined in the contractual
documents and facilitating the winning bidder in achieving its conditions
precedent so that the financing for the project is mobilized PROPOSED
CONTRIBUTION TO INITIATING TRANSFORMATION  Investments in this project will
contribute to GOB’ targets to have ,221 MW of utility-scale solar, 48 MW of
rooftop solar and ,370 MW of wind by Phase  grid-connected investments will
establish that market for grid-scale RE in Bangladesh Funds proposed for this
project are sufficient to cover up to 200 MW of installed utility scale and
rooftop solar PV capacity (this is  tentative target and will change subject to
composition of the resource,  solar vs wind) supported Funding will be flexible
so that wind projects can be added Specific targets will be developed during
project preparation IMPLEMENTATION READINESS  SREDA will be responsible for the
coordination of Bangladesh’ SREP Program As the institution established by the
GoB to promote renewable energy (and energy efficiency) in Bangladesh, SREDA has
the functional authority needed to coordinate the activities and ensure
compliance with monitoring and evaluation requirements of the development
partners Components supported by the World Bank (including IDA allocation) will
be channeled through IDCOL, which has been 109 managing the successful renewable
energy program of the World Bank since 2003 under the RERED program that
includes the flagship SHS program IDCOL is run by professional management under
effective oversight by  competent Board Following the successful SHS program,
IDCOL has been replicating the public- private partnership arrangement of the
SHS program for renewable energy based mini-grids and solar irrigation pumps as
well As  company, IDCOL is able to offer market based incentive package to its
management and staff IDCOL will be responsible for day-to-day management of the
component following Bank' fiduciary guidelines and procedures It will also be
responsible for the monitoring of the component' activities and results and
submission of quarterly/semi-annual reports to SREDA  Resource availability for
wind and solar was estimated by the Solar Wind Energy Resource Assessment
(SWERA), completed by the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) and the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) in SWERA, however, does not provide the micro-
scale mapping necessary for utility-scale wind resource development, and  more
detailed wind resource assessment is currently underway with support from USAID
Availability of land for roof-top solar has been estimated by two existing
studies on rooftop space available for solar PV in parts of Dhaka and
Chittagong; however, these studies are not sufficient for an investment-grade
estimate of technical potential therefore  detailed assessment should take place
prior to investment RATIONALE FOR SREP FINANCING  SREP financing will create
enabling environment for grid-connected large scale RE applications by
supporting detailed resource assessment, which should be ready in advance of
developing proper PPP arrangements SREP financing to investment in projects will
establish the bankability of RE projects within the emerging regulatory
framework and contribute to lowering the cost of electricity SREP financing
could help the early projects mitigate some of the perceived risks associated
with first-mover projects, which affect investor confidence and thus limit the
availability of private sector financing for these projects While the potential
returns on investment in utility-scale PV has stimulated interest from few
developers to date, no project has reached financial close or started
construction SREP support will also help lay the ground for leveraging of
substantial financing from the private sector for utility scale RE development
by helping the first projects obtain appropriate long-term financing Successful
financial closure and development of the first few utility-scale RE projects
with support from SREP should demonstrate the viability of RE technologies in
the country, lowering of tariff as market gets more matured players, as well as
the soundness of the regulatory regime to support them SREP financing could be
provided in combination of the partial risk guarantees that would be offered by
the World Bank, if desired by private bidders, to reduce private investors risk
related to regulatory changes, or changes in macro-economic variables that are
difficult or unusually expensive to hedge (currency fluctuation, for example)
for government and the private sector 110 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT
MITIGATION PLAN  An environmental and social management framework (ESMF),
consistent with the requirements of the World Bank Group, will be developed as
part of project preparation As part of the RERED program supported by the World
Bank, there is  precedence of IDCOL successfully developing and implementing an
ESMF acceptable to the World Bank for the renewable energy program of IDCOL
(SHS, mini-grids, solar irrigation pumps, improved cookstoves, and biogas plants
for cooking) This ESMF will be the basis for developing the ESMF for the SREP
program RESULTS INDICATORS  Results indicators will be determined during the
project preparation stage Anticipated outcomes of the project include the
following: ; 170MW of utility-scale solar/wind generation capacity installed ;
32MW of rooftop solar PV installed ; increased supply of electricity generated
from renewable energy ; private sector investment leveraged ; Increased
government and private sector experience and capacity to develop large-scale RE
projects ; GHG emissions reduced or avoided FINANCING PLAN (RATIO = ) Appendix
Table  below shows the proposed financing plan for the project Appendix Table :
Proposed Financing Plan for Grid-Connected Renewables Project Private sector
SREP IDA credit IFC Govern- ment Other Total IDA guarantee* (Million US$) 45 45
Component : Investment in utility- scale solar and wind, and rooftop solar
Public 20  Private 25 25 95 95  Component : Resource assessment    Component :
Transaction advisory TOTAL 45 45 *  PRG or other guarantee instrument will be
used only if required by private sector bidders 111 LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES
The project will be implemented by the World Bank and IFC The World Bank will
support  credit line or refinancing facility for the private sector at the
government-owned financial intermediary (IDCOL) Partial risk guarantees would be
also considered subject to market needs IFC will undertake  direct investment in
grid-connected RE or solar rooftop project and implement the transaction
advisory component The timeline for the direct investment and transaction
advisory will depend upon the issuance of licensing and completion of PPA
negotiations with private developers PROJECT PREPARATION TIMETABLE The World
Bank will proceed with the component  on resource assessment using SREP project
preparation grant The project is expected to be processed for World Bank
approval in the first quarter of calendar year 2017, subject to the progress of
preparation activities IFC will conduct an initial market assessment following
approval of the SREP-Bangladesh IP Depending on market conditions and
appraisals, it is expected that the project will be submitted to the SREP Sub-
Committee for approval in the third quarter of 2016 and presented to the IFC
Board for approval in the first quarter of PROJECT PREPARATION GRANT The
Government of Bangladesh is requesting  project preparatory grant of US$95
million to undertake site-specific solar resource assessments in support of
national resource mapping for solar 112  Off-Grid Solar Photovoltaic PROBLEM
STATEMENT  Access to modern energy services is important in economic development
and addressing poverty reduction ADB’ energy sector assessment of Bangladesh
shows that the country’ demand for electricity growing at fast rate The
government’ “Vision 2021” and Power System Master Plan 2010 aims at achieving
universal access to grid connected electricity by 2021 with total installed
generating capacity of 20,000 MW by 2020 and 40,00MW by These are ambitious
targets but to achieve them, significant investments will be needed in both on
grid and off-grid power infrastructure  major effort of the government in
addressing power shortage is to raise electricity coverage—from 47% of
households in 2009 to 74% in 201576, with  yearly per-capita electricity usage
reaching about 321 kWh, which is still low compared to other South Asian
countries The government in recognizing that the sector challenges for
sustainable development is providing secure and high-quality electricity
services for all by initiating the 500 MW Solar PV Development   PV Pumping for
Agricultural Irrigation: In Bangladesh around 80% of the population earns their
livelihood from farming Rice constitutes over 90% of the country’ total food
grain production and about 77% of irrigated land area is irrigated with ground
water According to statistics from Rural Electrification Board (REB), Bangladesh
Power Development Board (BPDB), and Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development
Agency (SREDA), local farmers rely on some 266,000 electrically powered water
pumps to irrigate  million hectares During peak growing season, an additional
million diesel-run pumps are operated to irrigate another  million hectares
consuming about  million tons of diesel per annum, creating $280 million in
subsidies, while emitting more than 31 million tons of CO2  The government has
set  target for PV pumps of 150 MW by  PV mini-grids: This will mainly be
implemented in remote areas where grid expansion is not likely to happen in the
next  years The government has set an installed capacity target for PV mini-
grids of 25 MW (the individual mini-grid capacity has been assumed to be between
100 kWp and 250 kWp) PROJECT OBJECTIVE  The project will transform lives of
rural households through increased access to electricity by implementing
following  components: ; Component : PV pumps for agricultural irrigation
Financing would be grant based to the government; on-lent to  designated
implementing agency using financing structures and models available in the
market ( IDCOL); before being channeled to end-users ; Component : PV mini-grids
Financing would be grant based to the government; on-lent to the designated
implementing agencies; and channeled to sponsors or end-users 76 Power Division,
Bangladesh Power Sector: An Overview, September 113 ; Component : Technical
assistance for project preparation of components  and , including business
models; possible participation of private sector; related regulation; technical
studies to diagnose possible barriers and issues that may appear during project
implementation PROPOSED CONTRIBUTION TO INITIATING TRANSFORMATION  The Scaling-
up Renewable Energy Program in Low Income Countries (SREP) financing will
address the gap in the climate finance architecture by ensuring  direct
assistance in adopting low carbon energy technologies and using renewable energy
to improve rural energy access Investments in this project proposal will
contribute to the government’ global target of implementing 25 MWp of mini-
grid, and 150 MWp PV pump capacity under the 500 MWp Solar Development Program
The proposed off grid project will provide up to 25 MWp of mini-grids (to be
confirmed during project preparation) and  MWp 77 of PV pumping capacity 78,
while contributing to the government’ goal in achieving universal access to
electricity by The mini-grid component has the potential to provide 75,000 to
100,00079 new electricity connections in more than 150 rural areas In addition,
PV pumps can also improve access to electricity by offering use of power
services during low irrigation season IMPLEMENTATION READINESS  The government
has gained experience through its extensive nationwide implementation of PV
pumping and mini-grids systems, including related business models Both
technologies are mature and reliable, however like any other rural
infrastructure, it will require adequate maintenance systems in place for
ensuring sustainable operation  Compared to conventional diesel motor based
pumping and power systems, PV pumping and mini-grids are the best low cost
supply options in rural areas, while its application range is constantly
increasing due to price decreases and improvements of PV generation and pumping
technologies Following advantages are key assets for the off-grid projects: ()
use of PV eliminates air pollution, noise disturbances, and soil pollution from
motor oil and fuel spills; (ii) no fuel requirement, thus operation is
independent of fuel availability and price development issues; (iii) the only
practical solution/option in non-electrified areas where logistics make it too
expensive or even impossible to supply diesel fuel; (iv) can be located close to
demand centers, thus distribution and transmission losses are minimal; and ()
can run automatically and require little & ( PV pumps can store energy in tanks,
which feeds water by gravity) 77 ADB Report and Recommendation of the President
to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the People’ Republic of Bangladesh
for the Power System Efficiency Improvement Project Manila (new component of
Loan 2769-BAN, Part [iv]), Solar Photovoltaic Pumping for Agricultural
Irrigation ($20 million budget comprising ,500 PV pumps, using  mixed capacity
between 2kWp and 15kWp) 78 Assumption:  kWp to 15 kWp mixed capacity based on
the IDCOL model approach The possible installation potential under the SREP
initiative could reach up to MWp, to be confirmed during project preparation 79
World Bank estimates 114 RATIONALE FOR SREP FINANCING  ADB strongly supports
Bangladesh efforts in achieving  “transformational change” towards low carbon
development strategies through public and private sector investments in the
power and energy sectors The SREP funding will enable low carbon energy pathways
to be optimized by exploiting indigenous renewable energy potential to offset
fossil-based energy supply In addition, SREP will help capturing other co-
benefits such as avoid environmental pollution; diffusion of low carbon
technologies and industries; and improve climate resilience, while reducing
greenhouse gas emissions (GHG), where 40% results from energy production and use
Climate finance will play  crucial role in assisting Bangladesh in making the
transition to  more environmentally sustainable system of energy production and
use, while also addressing development priorities of improving rural energy
access; energy security and poverty ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT MITIGATION
PLAN The comprehensive review and evaluation of PV technologies over the entire
life cycle has produced  clear picture of their key environmental indicators ;
The decommissioning of PV modules is seen as an environmental challenge for the
solar industry To address this challenge, an international PV industry program
that is addressing the recycling challenge in Europe, has been established The
first large-scale dismantling facility for end-of-life modules was introduced in
Europe in 2009 under PV CYCLE; ; The energy payback period of  PV system has
declined to approximately one year PV systems emit no GHGs or air pollutants
during normal operation The material extraction and production stages account
for almost all emissions in the PV life cycle The largest concern is associated
with fluorinated GHG emissions Recent trends show that releases of these gases
are on the decline, which may be attributed to more efficient manufacturing
processes and the use of alternative substances ; Water use in the life cycle of
PV technologies is mainly from upstream usage related to manufacturing and is
considered to be minimal No water is used during the operation of PV systems,
except for when modules are cleaned In addition, the impacts on water quality
are considered to be minimal ; Ground-mounted applications can have
significant, though localized, impacts on landscape and ecology As module
efficiency increases, land use will decrease However, it has been demonstrated
that when PV power plants are constructed using best management practices, they
can provide  positive benefit to biodiversity Another benefit of PV power plants
is that they can be located on marginal lands and brownfields They can also be
used on higher-quality lands in conjunction with grazing livestock and crops -
No social impacts or resettlement are expected 115 RESULTS INDICATORS Results
indicators will be determined during the project preparation stage Anticipated
results and outcomes of the project include the following: ; Dynamic sector
reform process achieved through deployment of investment friendly policy,
regulatory, and legal frameworks ; Public and private sector investment
leveraged ; Countrywide deployment of off-grid PV technologies provides people,
businesses and community services improved access to electricity ; At least
[10,000]80 households connected to proposed PV systems ; At least [30]81 MWp of
functioning off-grid PV infrastructure ; Increased supply of electricity
generated from renewable energy82 ; Reduction in diesel consumption83 ; GHG
emissions reduced or avoided 84 FINANCING PLAN (Ratio = ) Appendix Table :
Proposed Financing Plan for Off-Grid Solar PV SREP ADB Government Other  Total
Private sector (Million US$)  75 TBD 75  Component : Investment in mini-grids 60
TBD  Component : Investment in solar irrigation 95 95  Component : Project
preparation TOTAL 95 35 LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES The Power Division has
appointed REB as the formal implementing agency of the Solar Photovoltaic
Pumping for Agricultural Irrigation ($20 million budget 80 Number of Household
connections based on  MWp Final number will be determined during project
preparation 81 30MWp of PV capacity is composed by initial  MWp of PV pumps and
25 MWp of mini-grids The capacity potential under the project can reach up to 38
MWp Final capacity will be determined during project preparation 82 Target kWh
amount will be determined during project preparation 83 Target percentage
reduction from current level will be determined during project preparation 84
Target tons of GHG emissions avoided will be determined during project
preparation 116 comprising ,500 PV pumps) under ADB’ ongoing loan The
implementation agencies for the mini-grid component will be defined during
project preparation PROJECT PREPARATION TIMETABLE Appendix Table  below shows
the proposed schedule for project preparation Appendix Table : Proposed Schedule
Task  Internal approval PV pumps  Internal approval PV mini-grids  SREP sub-
committee approval  ADB/ SREP project kick-start Timeline and milestones Done Q3
2016 Q1 2016 and Q4 2016 Q2 2016 and Q2 2017 consideration PROJECT PREPARATION
GRANT The Government of Bangladesh is seeking  project preparatory grant of
US$95 million to prepare the project The grant will consider possible
participation of private sector; assess needed regulation; and conduct technical
and financial studies 117  Waste-to-Energy Advisory Support PROBLEM STATEMENT
Approximately 13,383 tons of solid waste are produced daily in Bangladesh; more
than ,379 tons come from Dhaka alone Despite vast resource potential (in terms
of daily municipal waste production), the absence of established waste
collection procedures has acted as  barrier to development of this technology
PROJECT OBJECTIVE  The project consists of transaction advisory to help the GoB
identify the technical and commercial options for developing  WtE plant The
objective of this project is to develop  comprehensive business model for  WtE
project that takes into account both the technical and managerial challenges in
Bangladesh The work completed under the transaction advisory would include the
development of  feasibility study and “business case” to consider options for
ownership and operation Such options would include  purely public arrangement
(government owned and operated); and various types of PPP arrangements (for
example, management contracts, leases, or concessions) PROPOSED CONTRIBUTION TO
INITIATING RTANSFORMATION  The GoB’ RE targets for 2021 include 40 MW in waste
to power from municipal waste This project would enable investment in future
waste-to-energy projects as part of Phase  of this IP The WtE model developed in
this project could also be incorporated into future waste management plans for
Dhaka, Chittagong, and other major cities IMPLEMENTATION READINESS  The advisory
services would be procured through the World Bank with SREDA acting as the
client SREDA regularly works with advisors as part of various MDB projects,
including preparation of the SREP IP RATIONALE FOR SREP FINANCING  The GoB has
shown great interest in developing  WtE plant Previous attempts have failed due
to the technical issues related to waste collection SREP funds would be used to
develop  business model that take into account the inherent challenges of
building the first WtE plant in Bangladesh ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT
MITIGATION PLAN  There are no environmental or social impacts anticipated as
result of this project RESULTS INDICATORS  The project will result in the
identification of  business model to be used for building  WtE plant Additional
indicators may be identified during the project preparation process FINANCING
PLAN (Ratio = /) Appendix Table  below shows the proposed financing plan for the
project 118 Appendix Table : Proposed Financing Plan for Waste to Energy Private
sector SREP MDB Government Other Total (Million US$)  Component : Transaction
advisory for WtE plant (including feasibility study)   TOTAL   LEAD IMPLEMENTING
AGENCIES  The advisory services could either be procured through the World Bank
following World Bank procurement rules SREDA will act as the client with the
potential for World Bank staff to provide management support if necessary
PROJECT PREPARATION TIMETABLE  The World Bank anticipates submitting the project
for Board approval in the first quarter of calendar year 2017 PROJECT
PREPARATION GRANT Project preparation grants are not being requested for this
project 119 Appendix : Stakeholder Consultations Bangladesh’ SREP Investment
Plan is the result of an extensive internal and public consultation process, led
by the Government of Bangladesh and represented by the Sustainable Renewable
Energy Development Authority (SREDA) to identify priorities in the development
of renewable energy technologies The consultations included  broad range of
government agencies, as well as representatives from the private sector, civil
society organizations (CSOs) and donors Feedback was sought through one-on-one
meetings and group workshops with stakeholders Scoping Mission  World Bank Group
and Asian Development Bank team Joint SREP Scoping mission took place between
January 26 and 28, Participants in the stakeholder meeting included
representatives from: Power Division; SREDA; Economic Relations Division of the
Ministry of Finance; Infrastructure Development Company Limited; USAID;
Department for International Cooperation Agency (JICA) International Development
(DFID); and Japan Inception and Data Collection Phase (April 2015) The inception
phase of the project took place in April As part of this phase members of SREDA’
consultant team collected any readily available data and studies on renewable
energy technology in Bangladesh Datasets on resource availability for wind and
solar were collected from the Solar Wind Energy Resource Assessment (SWERA) that
had been completed by the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) and the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) in Other information on renewable energy
projects was found in academic papers and reports from donor banks, power
companies, and local financial institutions As  next step, members of the
consultant team met with stakeholders to gather anecdotal information and any
additional studies on ongoing and proposed renewable energy projects  list of
the organizations and agencies contacted by the consultants is presented in
Appendix Table  120 Appendix Table : Stakeholders Contacted during Inception
Phase Government Agencies ; Power Division (BPD) ; Local Government ; Bangladesh
Council of Engineering Department (LGED) Scientific and Industrial Research
(BCSIR) Utility Companies ; Rural Electrification Board (REB) ; Bangladesh Power
Development Board (BPDB) Financial Institutions ; Grameen Shakti ;
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) Multilateral and Bilateral
Agencies ; kfW ; USAID Dhaka ; World Bank Group ; Japan International ; Asian
Development Bank (ADB) Dhaka Cooperation Agency (JICA) ; GIZ Dhaka Academic and
Research Institutions ; Bangladesh University of Energy and Technology (BUET),
Centre for Energy Studies (CES) ; Renewable Energy Research Center (RERC), Dhaka
University First Technical Mission (May-June 2015) The purpose of the first
technical mission was to solicit feedback from stakeholders on the technical and
financial evaluations completed for the draft IP The mission included
discussions between SREDA, its consultants, the MDB team working on SREP, and
other key stakeholders The analytical work completed in preparing the IP
included  comprehensive assessment of renewable energy technologies identified
during the data collection phase The technologies included: solar parks, rooftop
solar, solar home systems, wind parks, biomass for electricity, biogas for
electricity, small hydropower, microgrids, solar irrigation, geothermal, and
improved clean cook stoves The mission included an open stakeholder consultation
workshop to get feedback on the analysis This was held by SREDA on June , 2015
and included representatives from the government, utility companies, civil
society organizations, private sector, and donor organizations (see Appendix
Table ) SREDA opened the workshop by discussing ongoing projects and Government
plans for renewable energy investment Recent work highlighted included  PPA
agreement for utility-scale solar and  study on biomass for electricity The
SREDA representative then discussed the Government’ 500 MW solar target for 2015
and another plan to install ,016 MWs of RE capacity by 2021, in order to achieve
the goal of 10 percent generation from renewable resources SREDA outlined three
models to be used for procuring utility-scale wind and solar: () Public Land +
Public Ownership; () Public land + Private Ownership; and () Private land +
Private Ownership SREDA discussed the Government’ plan to have project 121
developers operate for 20 years with  tariff to cover the levelized cost SREDA
noted that technical and economic consideration will be needed if the company
has the capability to carry out the project Appendix Table : Attendees of
Stakeholder Meeting Government Agencies ; Power Division (BPD) ; Power Cell ;
Local Government Engineering ; Bangladesh Council of Department (LGED)
Scientific and Industrial Research (BCSIR) ; Bangladesh Energy Regulatory
Council (BERC) Utility Companies ; Rural Electrification Board (REB) ; Dhaka
Power Distribution Company ; Northwest Power Generation Company ; Power
Generation Company Ltd ; Rural Power Company ; Bangladesh Power Development
Board (BPDB) ; Dhaka Electric Supply Company ; West Zone Power Distribution
Company ; Electric Generation Company of Bangladesh Financial Institutions ;
Infrastructure Development Company ; Bangladesh Infrastructure Finance Fund
Limited (IDCOL) ; Grameen Shakti Limited (BIFFL) ; Bangladesh Bank Multilateral
and Bilateral Agencies ; kfW ; World Bank Group ; SNV Netherlands ; GIZ Dhaka ;
UNDP ; IFC ; JICA Academic and Research Institutions ; Institute of Energy
Economics-Japan ; Ahsanullah University of Science & Technology Private
Companies ; Bangladesh Biogas Development ; Bangladesh Organic Products
Manufacturers Association Foundation ; Bright Green Energy Foundation ; Bangla
German Solar Power Plant ; Bangladesh Solar & Renewable Energy Association ;
East Coast Group ; Filament Energy Ltd ; Global Green Energy Ltd ; Keystone
Business Support Ltd ; Rahimafrooz Renewable Energy Ltd ; Saif Powertech Ltd ;
Wind Resources Mapping Project Development Company ; Gazi Associates ; Greenergy
Solutions Ltd ; Green Power Electrical & Electronics ; Solar Electro Bangladesh
Ltd ; Solaren Foundation ; Solaric Civil Society Organizations ; Dhaka Ahsania
Mission 122 Following  presentation by SREDA’ consultants on the renewable
energy assessment, stakeholders were asked to provide feedback Appendix Table
below summarizes the comments received at the meeting Appendix Table : Co-
Benefits Associated with SREP Impacts and Outcomes Category Comments ; Recovery
rate for RE is discouraging considering the high Comments on barriers/solutions
to RE investment investment costs ; Private sector investment should be
encouraged with better lending rates, bank financing at nine percent is too high
; Biogas is not  realistic option because gasification process takes too long ;
Regional cooperation with Nepal or India could benefit hydropower projects ; It
is important to take into consideration land availability ; Grid expansion is
risk to private investors of minigrids ; Small hydropower not feasible due to
social impacts, this should be included in assessment ; Situation for tariff for
renewable energy is unclear ; Information needs to be better disseminated to the
private sector ; Category of land influences cost of project ; Waste-to-energy
project, Clean City Clean Fuel, should be Recommendations on other technologies
or projects to consider included ; Canals for fish culture and solar on top
should be considered ; Tidal power and hydrokinetic energy should be considered
; Solar home systems are already successful, medium size systems should be focus
of future programs, can be used in nanogrid applications ; Waste to energy power
plant should be considered ; Post harvesting agro-waste (like Maize) can be used
for power Suggestions on different biofuel and biomass feedstocks to consider
generation ; Water hyacinth can be used as biomass ; Castor oil, jatropha, and
maize plants are potential feedstocks for biofuel ; Sludge from textile mills
could be used for biogas production ; Biomass pellets should be used as an
alternative to twigs for ICS ; Comparison of off-grid levelized cost should be
to LNG/Diesel ; Overall cost assumptions are too high Comments on the cost
analysis ; The technical potential for rooftop solar needs to be higher, try
Comments on the technical assumptions to base it on rooftop availability ;
Potential mentioned in the presentation is not enough Another goal of this
mission was to get feedback on the set of criteria to be used to evaluate and
prioritize projects for the IP During the stakeholder meeting participants 123
were asked to complete  survey in which they ranked various National and SREP
criteria in order of importance The results of the survey indicated that the
Second Technical Mission (July 2015) An MDB team consisting of the World Bank,
International Finance Corporation (IFC), and Asian Development Bank (ADB)
visited Bangladesh in the period July , 2015 to conduct  Joint Mission The main
objectives were () to discuss progress on the preparation of the SREP Investment
Plan (IP) with the Government and the main stakeholders; () to discuss with the
Government and agree on the prioritization of renewable energy projects to be
supported under the SREP; and () to agree on the next steps and the timetable to
finalize the investment plan and to submit it to the SREP Sub-Committee for
approval in November As part of the mission SREDA and the Government agreed with
the key stakeholders and the MDB team on  set of criteria for prioritization of
renewable technologies Based on the agreed upon priorities, the Government
identified the following renewable energy technologies to be supported with
combination of SREP funds (subject to approval of SREP IP), public financing,
and private sector investments: ) utility-scale solar PV and wind; ii) grid-
connected solar rooftop; iii) solar irrigation; iv) solar/hybrid mini-grids, and
) waste-to-energy development support The Government also agreed to include in
the IP  broader set of renewable energy priorities to help access other sources
of climate finance, such as the Green Climate Fund (GCF) These included utility-
scale wind and other renewable energy, scaling up solar irrigation, biogas for
household and commercial use, scaling up improved cookstoves, waste-to-energy
investment, and grid integration of renewable energy In addition, SREDA and its
consultants held two workshops to solicit feedback from stakeholders on
substantive portions of the draft IP, which had been circulated in advance
First,  briefing for the MDB team and representatives from KfW, GiZ, USAID,
DFID, and UNDP was held on July 28, Second,  workshop was held for
representatives of private sector, civil society organizations (CSOs), research
institutions and academia (see Appendix Table ) on July 29, Appendix Table :
Attendees of Private Sector Stakeholder Meeting Academic and Research
Institutions ; Dhaka International University ; Bangladesh University of Energy
and ; Institute of Energy Economics-Japan Technology (BUET) Private Companies ;
Maxtech Ltd ; Rehimafrooz Renewable Energy Ltd ; Bangladesh Solar & Renewable
Energy Association (BSREA) ; Mars Renewable Civil Society Organizations ;
Practical Action Bangladesh ; Dhaka Ashania Mission 124 Appendix : Co-Benefits
Section  highlighted some of the environmental, social and gender co-benefits
likely to result from Bangladesh’ SREP IP This section focuses specifically on
the co-benefits tracked under SREP’ Revised Results Framework (as of June ,
2012) Appendix Table  lists the co- benefits considered under SREP’ Revised
Results Framework, and describes how those co- benefits will be achieved in
Bangladesh Appendix Table : Co-Benefits Associated with SREP Impacts and
Outcomes SREP Transformative Impact Results Co-benefits Description ; All of the
technologies in Bangladesh’ SREP IP could Support low-carbon development
pathways by increasing energy security Avoided GHG emissions result in reduction
of GHG emissions in line with global and national efforts to fight climate
change, including the Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (2009)
; All of the technologies in Bangladesh’ SREP IP have the potential for
temporary and long-term job creation ; Job opportunities for marginalized groups
in rural areas and empowerment of women via training opportunities in relation
to the deployment of off-grid solar PV Employment opportunities ; With the
deployment of waste-to-energy, job opportunities in the supply chain (, waste
delivery and management) SREP Programme Outcomes Results Co-benefits Description
; All of the technologies in Bangladesh’ SREP IP would Increased supply of
renewable energy (RE) New and additional resources for renewable energy
projects/programmes Increased reliability improve the reliability of energy
supply ; Grid-connected technologies result in improved access to and
reliability of the electricity grid, benefitting rural areas and hospitals with
uninterruptible power supply ; Waste-to-energy can also provide heat energy to
local areas (businesses and domestic) if so designed ; Grid-connected solar PV
(whether utility-scale or Reduced costs of RE rooftop) and wind are nearly cost
competitive with the current cost of emergency diesel generation in Bangladesh
and with the likely future cost of generation from imported coal or LNG ; Off-
grid solar PV can provide electricity for household use or irrigation at lower
cost than diesel generation ; SREP funding will be used to launch first projects
in grid- connected RE which show cost competitiveness with thermal generation ;
SREP grants will be used to provide temporary grant funding or concessional
loans to off-grid RE technologies, making them more affordable 125 Appendix :
Comments from Independent Technical Reviewer Appendix Table  below presents the
comments received from the independent technical review of the IP and the IP
team’ response to each comment Appendix Table : Technical Review Response Matrix
Comments Replies Agreed  section on with additional details on implementation
arrangements has been added It is surprising that, apart from the very
successful solar home PV installation program, to date the IP suggests that
there have been relatively few renewable installations This lack of progress
raises some concerns as to how achievable the targets proposed within the IP
will be  request has been made that the final draft of the IP elaborate on the
planned implementation of the various projects to provide some reassurance that
the capacity and resources are in place to justify the approval of funding at
the level requested It is also important to note that, whereas there have been
relatively few renewable installations, there have been many thermal power
stations, under both traditional public procurement and IPP modalities The
filters are very conservative because of the scarcity of land in Bangladesh
Technical potential was limited to % of land shown through GIS mapping to be
available This % limit or “filter” was applied, instead of % or %, so as to show
technical potential roughly consistent with Government targets For both solar
and wind developments an assessment is undertaken on actual potential An
approach that limits land for grid connected solar parks to government owned or
non-arable land suggests that this might limit the potential substantially; on
an available land area basis it is suggested that only some 2000 MW of PV is
likely if this limit were applied This implies that without substantial
expansion beyond these areas, the 2021 PV target might approach this limit We
have now tried to make this clearer in the text Government plans will of course
be adjusted over time as Bangladesh achieves better clarity on the true
technical potential of solar and wind Wind power projections on  similar basis,
limiting installations to land areas where flooding is not an issue, suggest an
optimistic total of less than 1000 MW It is important that there be
reconciliation between these (imposed) limits and the plans that the GoB is
promoting Clearly land access, flooding considerations and competing uses are of
key concern and will no doubt have  strong impact on the rate and volume of PV
and wind installations that can be achieved It also needs to be recognized that
while the SHS and solar parks use the same fundamental PV technology, there are
significant differences in scale, investment, power sales agreements, This is
fair point, but as noted above, Bangladesh has extensive experience with large
scale thermal power stations, both publicly- owned and IPPs 126 Comments Replies
operations and maintenance and underlying risks in developing and operating
large scale grid connected PV installations Moreover, the benefit of SREP
involvement is that the IFIs involved can actively help Bangladesh work through
the challenges associated with these new technologies as they procure them As
final note, the scale of the grid-connected installations proposed for SREP-
funding are small relative to the size of the power sector within Bangladesh
These would be modestly sized first-projects only, not  major roll-out of new
plants As planning proceeds for projects under the IP / SREP, it will be
important that the effective integration of any projects within the national
energy plans is clear before final commitments to their implementation Part of
the IP’ justification for SREP support is that the proposed projects will assist
as practical demonstrations of what could be achieved with wider support from
the private sector (and other funders) This assumption should be revisited as
each project is better defined The overall investment proposal that the SREP
funds will help seed makes assumptions about significant additional investments
that will be secured through MDBs and the private sector Confirmation of the
commitment from these sources should be  key element in making  final decision
on the provision of funds under SREP Agreed SREDA’ involvement, as the main
coordinating entity for the SREP IP ensures that project funded under SREP will
be tightly integrated into national energy plans And, as the reviewer suggests,
the assumptions behind the IP will be revisited during each project’
preparation, and checked for consistency with SREP criteria for support As noted
earlier, the reliance of the overall plan on significant co-funding from MDBs
and the private sector needs to be tested thoroughly to ensure that commitments
are in place before SREP funds are released There is complexity in funding with
blended financing, offering partial risk guarantees and using PPPs and this
should not be underestimated as its resolution will impact on project execution
timelines Agreed, the arrangements for financing will be clarified, and
adjusted, as necessary, during each project’ preparation, with extensive
assistance anticipated from IFIs in deciding on the proper financing modalities
It may be of value to review the role that the SREP funds would play in
expanding the off-grid PV activities – mini-grids and solar irrigation; are
these areas where the existing skills within the private sector could play
leading role, building national capability on the back of the SHS Agreed The
private sector, can and does play  role in mini-grid and solar irrigation
technologies We will make their roles clearer in the IP 127 Comments Replies
experience? It is noted in the IP that for mini- grids “IDCOL has  program for
micro and mini- grids but existing projects have run into regulatory and
operational problems but that IDCOL has  pipeline of 21 projects with investor
interest” The impact of this situation on implementation needs clarification As
for the problems IDCOL has experienced with such projects, we now highlighted in
the draft what these problems have been and how we anticipate they will be
mitigated (see Section  on Implementation Assessment and Risk Potential) They
are mostly related to areas where grid extensions reach areas served by
mini-/micro-grids or where customers perceive that grid connections are imminent
IDCOL and SREDA are working with the Ministry of Power, Energy and Natural
Resources and BPDB to achieve better regulatory clarity on this issue in  way
that will avoid stranding mini-/micro-grid assets or dissuading off-grid
customers from participating in mini-/micro-grid arrangements Catalyze increased
investments in renewable energy: It is useful to view the investment targets in
the IP in ) the context of the size of Bangladesh’ power sector relative to
other countries funded by SREP and in ii) the level of private sector activity
in Bangladesh’ power sector Bangladesh is potentially the largest country to
receive SREP funds in terms of both population and GDP It is nearly the double
the largest economy (Kenya) to receive SREP funds and its population is 64
percent larger than the second largest SREP country (Ethiopia) Unsurprisingly,
the larger economy and population also result in Bangladesh having  peak demand
times greater than any other country that has previously receive SREP funds
(Ghana) The plan outlines how it is anticipated that SREP investments and
program support will help attract other donor and private funding As noted this
is an aggressive plan with SREP funding the basis for what is anticipated would
see significant leverage of other funds This has yet to be clearly demonstrated
as achievable There does however appear to be  reasonable level of private
sector interest and capability Taking these numbers into context the anticipated
leverage in funds seems in line with  power system of this size combined with
the significant technical potential The leverage anticipated could actually be
considered conservative given that SREP plans in Honduras, Kenya, Ethiopia, and
Tanzania had higher anticipated leverage from SREP funds It is also important to
consider that the private sector has already played  major role in off-grid RE
investments in Bangladesh  similar private sector market for grid-connected
projects is anticipated to arise once the first demonstration projects come
online Enabling environment Agreed SREDA will, in cooperation with the IFIs,
closely monitor the roles of the implementing agencies and, as necessary, change
course 128 Comments Replies The IP acknowledges that there are  number of
unaddressed hurdles to renewable implementation; there are strategies and an
allocation of responsibilities to particular agencies to address these Without
prior engagement with these agencies it is hard to assess whether these tasks
can reasonably achieved by these entities This process will require close
monitoring as the success in establishing  sound enabling environment will be
key control on the value of the SREP investments However, it is important to
note that the main implementing agency for most of the project components will
likely be IDCOL, which has an excellent track record implementing renewable
energy projects Increase energy access: The SREP IP has  balance of grid-
connected and off-grid energy projects, to reflect the fact that, though BPDB is
aggressively extending the grid, some areas of Bangladesh will for many years
continue without grid-connected supply The need for increased access to energy
is clear The SREP support will help accelerate this in some areas but is also
being targeted at grid connected supply which generally may have limited impact
on improving access at an individual level Mention is made of SREP funds being
used to reduce cost / increase affordability; use of funds for these purposes
needs to be judicious to ensure that any subsidies, their impacts and eventual
withdrawal are carefully considered On the use of SREP funds to reduce
cost/increase affordability, agreed IDCOL tracks the level of private sector
involvement in various types of projects and technologies and adjusts the level
of capital subsidies accordingly For example, subsidies for solar home systems
are expected to be phased-out in the coming years, given the extent of
unsubsidized private sector involvement outside of IDCOL’ programs
Implementation capacity: Agreed, we have included  section on implementing
arrangements in the revised draft It is understood that IDCOL will be the
implementing agency for the grid connected program They have successfully
overseen the off-grid work but as noted the grid interconnection of renewables
brings  number of fresh challenges The IP authors have agreed to define in
limited way the intentions around implementation and the capacity of those
nominated entities This area needs close consideration; the ability to
effectively plan and management project implementation and ensure timely
utilization of funds is critical Improve the long-term economic viability of the
renewable energy sector: Agreed Please see our response to the comment above
regarding subsidies The renewable energy sector in Bangladesh has been largely
focused on off grid SHS activities The IP lists  number of private sector
entities 129 Comments Replies that have been engaged in the domestic PV market
and these notes are encouraging Clearly there are still policy and regulatory
issues that need resolution;  number of “stalled” projects are noted but
attention appears to be directed at resolving the issues that they are facing
Given the indicated limitations on land for large scale PV and wind
developments, it is clear that the contribution that renewables will make is
important but only part of the solution It is often suggested that SREP funded
activities will drive  more focused and sustainable basis for future growth;
there needs to be increased private sector engagement and this will only occur,
on  sustained basis, when regulatory and pricing signals are clear and
acceptable to the market SREP funds must therefore be directed into projects
where conditions are conducive to ensuring such outcomes As noted, care must be
taken to avoid inappropriate subsidies that cause market distortions
Transformative impact: The value of SREP support comes not just from the funding
and “demonstration effect”, but also through the involvement in IFIs in
providing TA which supports high quality transactions and sustainable commercial
models The models developed by IDCOL for off-grid projects have already been
proven The World Bank and IFC will work with Government to ensure that these
first grid-connected projects funded by SREP will be prepared in such  way that
they are replicable The targeted nature of the proposed SREP investments in
Bangladesh is seen as pragmatic given the current energy market status, limited
electricity access and  need to enhance the enabling environment Given the
renewable sector is relatively immature it is not to be expected that there will
be major transformations in the market through SREP alone but if well managed
and executed the proposed program should help further develop the wider
renewable energy sector in the country Experience suggests that demonstration
projects with specialist funding, such as SREP, will not necessarily ensure that
an attractive commercial market place results quickly Agreed The Investment
Proposal in itself is thorough and comprehensive With  concern over the
depletion of gas reserves, the solar and wind options appear to offer acceptably
priced options for generation  grid connected focus is perhaps the preferred
option in terms of helping grow the renewables contribution as 130 Comments
Replies rapidly as possible; the success of the SHS program must continue to
address the question of broader access to energy for those located away from
existing grid networks The attraction of the private sector into grid connected
projects is recognized as challenging but part of the SREP program will be to
test the practicality of PPP projects and this experience can only be of value
in determining the best models for future expansion of the energy sector Agreed
Please see our response to the comment regarding subsidies, above Off grid
activities, beyond the SHS work, may be more immediately attractive to the
private sector and care should be taken to ensure that the availability of SREP
funds does not discourage this participation Generic cost analysis for various
technologies supports their consideration; more thorough business plans for each
project should however be prepared in due course to ensure that the individual
aspects of each are adequately considered to ensure commercial viability Agreed
More detailed business plans will be prepared as part of each project’
preparation 131 Appendix : Preparation Grant and MDB Payment Requests Appendix
Table : SREP Project Preparation Grant Request (Grid-Connected Renewables) SREP
INVESTMENT PROGRAM Project Preparation Grant Request  Country/Region:  CIF
Project ID#: Bangladesh / South Asia (Trustee will assign ID)  Project Title:
Tentative SREP Funding Request (in USD million total) for Project at the time of
Investment Plan submission (concept stage): Grid-Connected Renewables US$95
million  US$25 million loan  US$ million grant  Preparation Grant Request (in
USD): US$95 million MDB: World Bank  National Project Focal Point: Tapos Kumar
Roy SREDA  National Implementing Agency (project/program):  MDB SREP Focal Point
and Project/Program Task Team Leader (TTL): Focal Point: Gevorg Sargsyan Program
Manager TTL: Zubair Sadeque Senior Energy Specialist Description of activities
covered by the preparation grant: The grant will cover activities related to the
preparation of: ; Solar energy resource mapping for selected sites in support of
national solar resource mapping  Outputs: Policy Framework Deliverable National
scale solar resource mapping Budget (indicative): Timeline November 2016 Amount
(USD Million) – estimates Expendituresb Consultants/technical assistance
Equipment Workshops/seminars/trainings Travel/transportation Others (admin
costs/operational costs) Contingencies (max 10%) Total cost Other contributions:
Timeframe (tentative): December 2015 to November 2016 $ $ $10 $05 US$95 million
132 Other partners involved in project design and implementationd: SREDA
(National focal point for SREP), Infrastructure Development Company Limited
(IDCOL) If applicable, explanation for why the grant is MDB executed: Given the
experience of the World Bank in renewable energy resource mapping,  Bank-
executed grant is requested Implementation Arrangements (including procurement
of goods and services): The procurement will be done by the World Bank following
its guidelines  Including the preparation grant request  These expenditure
categories may be adjusted during project preparation according to emerging
needs  In some cases, activities will not require approval of the MDB Board
Other local, national, and international partners expected to be involved in
project design and implementation 133 Appendix Table : MDB Request for Payment
for Project Implementation Services (Grid- Connected Renewables) SCALING UP
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES MDB Request for Payment of
Implementation Services Costs  Country/Region: Bangladesh / South Asia  CIF
Project ID#: (Trustee will assign ID)  Project Title: Grid-Connected Renewables
At time of project approval: At time of country program submission (tentative):
US$95 million  Request for project funding (USD mill): MDB: World Bank Initial
estimate - at time of Country program submission:  Estimated costs for MDB
project implementation services (USD mill): US$428,000 Date: Oct 2015 Final
estimate - at time of project approval:  First tranche: US$128,000  Request for
payment of MDB Implementation Services Costs (USDmill):  Second tranche:
Project/program financing category:  - Investment financing - additional to
ongoing MDB project □ - Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project
  - Investment financing - stand-alone □  - Capacity building - stand alone □
years Expected project  duration  Explanation of final estimate (no of years):
of MDB costs for implementation services: Justification for proposed stand-alone
financing in cases of above   or : /  lone financing in cases of above   or : If
final estimate in  above exceeds the relevant benchmark range, explain the
exceptional circumstances and reasons: / 134 Appendix Table : SREP Project
Preparation Grant Request (Off-Grid Solar PV) SREP INVESTMENT PROGRAMME Project
Preparation Grant Request  Country/Region:  CIF Project ID#: Bangladesh / South
Asia Off-Grid Solar PV (Trustee will assign ID)  Project Title:  Tentative SREP
Funding Request (in USD million total) for Project at the time of Investment
Plan submission (concept stage): Total Grant: $ 95 million ; US$ million for PV
mini- grids ; US$24 million for PV pumps ; US$95 million for PPG US$95 million
MDB: ADB  Preparation Grant Request (USD): SREDA  National Project Focal Point:
National Implementing Agency PV mini-grids: to be determined during preparation
PV pumps: REB (as appointed by Power Division) SREP Focal Point: Jiwan Acharya
Senior Climate Change Specialist (Clean Energy) (project/program):  MDB SREP
Focal Point and TTL: Paul Hattle Senior Climate Change Specialist (Clean Energy)
Project/Program Task Team Leader (TTL): Description of activities covered by the
preparation grant: The grant will cover activities related to the preparation
of:  Policy review, including needed regulations/ legal frame work; ii Review
existing business models; iii Explore ways of participation of private sector;
iv Technical studies to identify possible barriers and issues that may appear
during project implementation  Outputs: Policy Framework Deliverable Policy/
regulations/ legal framework review ((team) Business models and participation of
private sector (team) Technical studies (team) Demonstration Pilots (team) (iii)
Timeline  months  months ()  months  months Budget (indicative): Expenditures
Amount (USD) Estimates Consultants/technical assistance Equipment
Workshops/seminars/trainings Travel/transportation Others (admin
costs/operational costs) Contingencies (max 10%) Total cost Other contributions:
Timeframe (tentative):  months intermittent from January to October 2016 Other
partners involved in project design and implementation: 330,000 275,000 125,000
90,000 45,000 85,000 950,000 / SREDA; REB and designated implementing agencies
135 If applicable, explanation for why the grant is MDB executed: /
Implementation Arrangements (including procurement of goods and services): ADB
will administer the total amount of the SREP grant ADB hire  consulting firm and
individuals in accordance with its Guidelines on the Use of Consultants (2013,
as amended from time to time) Goods, including all equipment, will be procured
by ADB in accordance with ADB’ Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from
time to time) The consulting firm will be engaged through the fixed-budget
selection method, using  simplified technical proposal and output-based contract
The TA proceeds will be disbursed in line with ADB’ Technical Assistance
Disbursement Handbook (2010, as amended from time to time) Consultancy services
will be announced in ADB’ Consultant Management System  Including the
preparation grant request  These expenditure categories may be adjusted during
project preparation according to emerging needs  In some cases, activities will
not require approval of the MDB Board  Other local, national, and international
partners expected to be involved in project design and implementation 136
Appendix Table : MDB Request for Payment for Project Implementation Services
(Off-Grid Solar PV: Mini-Grids) SCALING UP RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM IN LOW-
INCOME COUNTRIES ADB Request for Payment of Implementation Services Costs
Country/Region: Bangladesh / South Asia  CIF Project ID#: (Trustee will assign
ID)  Project Title:  Request for project funding Off-Grid Solar PV: Mini-grids
At time of country program submission (tentative): US$ million At time of
project approval (tentative): (USD mill):  Estimated costs for MDB project
implementation services (USD mill): MDB: Asian Development Bank Initial estimate
- at time of Country program submission: US$ 428 million Date: October 2015
Final estimate - at time of project approval:  First tranche: US$ 214 million
Second tranche:  Request for payment of MDB Implementation Services Costs (USD
mill):  - Investment financing - additional to ongoing MDB project  -
Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project √  - Investment
financing - stand-alone   - Capacity building - standalone   Project/program
financing category:  Expected project duration  years (no of years):
Explanation of final estimate of MDB costs for implementation services:
Justification for proposed stand-alone financing in cases of above   or :  lone
financing in cases of above   or : 137 Appendix Table : MDB Request for Payment
for Project Implementation Services (Off-Grid Solar PV: Solar Irrigation)
SCALING UP RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES ADB Request for
Payment of Implementation Services Costs Country/Region: Bangladesh / South Asia
CIF Project ID#: (Trustee will assign ID) Project Title: Request for project
funding Off-Grid Solar PV: Solar Irrigation At time of country program
submission (tentative): US$24 million At time of project approval (tentative):
(USD mill): Estimated costs for MDB project implementation services (USD mill):
MDB: Asian Development Bank Initial estimate - at time of Country program
submission: US$ 428 million Date: October 2015 Final estimate - at time of
project approval:  First tranche: US$ 214 million Second tranche: Request for
payment of MDB Implementation Services Costs (USD mill):  - Investment financing
- additional to ongoing MDB project  - Investment financing - blended with
proposed MDB project √  - Investment financing - stand-alone   - Capacity
building - standalone  Project/program financing category: Expected project
duration  years (no of years): Explanation of final estimate of MDB costs for
implementation services: Justification for proposed stand-alone financing in
cases of above   or :  lone financing in cases of above   or : 138