 GAS SECTOR MASTER PLAN BANGLADESH 2017 Ramboll Hannemanns Allé 53 DK-2300
Copenhagen  Denmark  +45 5161 1000  +45 5161 1001  II Intended for Petrobangla,
PowerCell Document type Final Report Date 28 February 2018 Revision  Made by
Gang Lu, Per Jørgensen, Bent Svensson, Arnfried Lemp, Fraser Wyllie, Carsten
Møller Nielsen, Ioannis Abatzis, Asaduzzaman, Mirza Habib Checked by Per
Jørgensen, Bent Svensson, Arnfried Lemp, Søren Løvstad Christensen Approved by
Per Jørgensen, Søren Løvstad Christensen  CONTENTS                 10 11 12
16 24 24 25 28 29 Bangladesh energy sector current status –  burning challenge
29 44 46 52 59 62 64 66 68 69 71 73 80 80 98 106 122 123 124 124 126 126 135 136
137 139 139 140 143 144 148 157 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ROAD MAP AND RECOMMENDATIONS
INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT OF THE PROJECT Background Problem statement Overview of
this final report GAS DEMAND Scenarios Setting Gas demand forecast methodology
Power sector gas demand forecast Captive power sector gas demand forecast
Fertiliser sector gas demand forecast Industry sector gas demand forecast
Domestic sector gas demand forecast Commercial sector gas demand forecast CNG
sector gas demand forecast Total Gas Demand Forecast Regional Gas Demand
Forecast GAS SUPPLY Review of the upstream supply sector Gas reserve position
Country supply – production forecasts Review of GSPM 2006 Analysis of the
exploration program by public sector Analysis of the exploration program by
private sector Key recommendations for gas supply augmentation LEAST COST SUPPLY
SOLUTION Overall supply and demand Short-term Strategy (2017 – 2021) Medium-term
Strategy (2021 – 2030) Long-term Strategy (2031 – 2041) TRANSMISSION
INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN Gas transmission infrastructure planning Natural gas
transmission fundamentals Underground gas storage, small scale LNG and biogas
Existing and planned gas transmission system Transmission system modelling
REGIONAL GAS NETWORK II 157          The regional Euroasian gas network and
supply possibilities Feasibility for gas transmission hook-up to Bangladesh from
India159 161 Recommendations for integration in “Bay of Bengal” gas market161
164 164 164 167 Myanmar gas network and supply situation LNG IMPORT Locations
for all LNG Import facilities Overview of LNG Terminal Development Plans Update
of FSRU terminal planning in Bangladesh Economic Comparison between FSRU and
Land-based LNG Receiving 169 174 174 174 175 178 183 184 186 188 192 Findings
and recommendations - legal and regulatory analysis 192 Terminal 10 LEGAL AND
REGULATORY Objective Review of legal and regulatory documents Key entities in
the oil and gas sector and institutional set-up Gas tariffs Gas allocation and
pricing Upstream fiscal terms for the PSCs and Bidding process Regulatory
framework Imports of LNG and move towards  competitive gas market Timing of
introduction of dual markets III FIGURES Figure : Gas demand per sector and per
scenario   Figure : Future potential gas production   Figure : Net cost of
supply by geological area at USD 60/bbl environment   Figure : Examples of
import requirements as  function of upstream successes   Figure : Demand in
franchise areas in scenario    Figure : Short-term additional investments
Figure : Medium term additional investments  10 Figure : High level Long Term
Gas Transmission Plan  12 Figure : Gas Price reviews – consumer groups  14
Figure 10: Overall roadmap 17 Figure 11: Infrastructure action plan  21 Figure
12: Historical Energy Prices, USD/mmbtu  25 Figure 13: World Bank Commodities
Price Forecast (in nominal USD)  26 Figure 14: Primary Energy Consumption per
Capita  29 Figure 15: Energy Consumption Comparison - Bangladesh vs India vs
Thailand  30 Figure 16: Gas Share in Primary Energy Consumption (excl Biofuel &
Waste), 2016  31 Figure 17: Bangladesh Historical Gas Consumption  32 Figure 18:
Historical Gas Consumption by Sector  32 Figure 19: Bangladesh Historical Grid
Power Net Energy (excl Captive Power & Solar PV) Generation  33 Figure 20: Unit
Cost of Electricity Generation (BDT per KWh)  37 Figure 21: Electricity
Budgetary Support  37 Figure 22: End User Price Comparison (USD/mmBtu)  38
Figure 23: Gas subsidies as % of GDP GCC countries  38 Figure 24: Bangladesh
Real GDP Growth  46 Figure 25: Gas demand and supply 2016  47 Figure 26:
GSMP2006 – GDP Growth Scenarios  48 Figure 27: Bangladesh Gas Demand – Forecast
vs Consumption  48 Figure 28: Gas Demand Analysis – Industry Sector  49 Figure
29: Gas Demand Analysis – CNG Sector   50 Figure 30: GSMP2006 – National Power
Generation Dispatch Forecast – Case   51 Figure 31: Bangladesh historical
electricity consumption  52 Figure 32: Peak power curves  54 Figure 33:
Bangladesh Peak Power Demand Forecast  56 Figure 34: Power demand/generation
requirement forecast – Scenario   57 Figure 35: Power demand/generation forecast
– Scenario   57 Figure 36: Gas demand forecast – power sector  59 Figure 37: Gas
demand forecast – captive power sector  62 Figure 38: Gas demand analysis -
industry  64 Figure 39: Bangladesh GDP by sector  65 Figure 40: Gas demand
forecast – industry  66 Table of Contents: production : Page: 104  Figure 74:
New discoveries in Myanmar  131 Figure 75: Myanmar gas production  132 Figure
76: Spot LNG DES prices in Europe and Asia, USD/mmbtu  133 Figure 77: Global LNG
long-term contracts  135 Figure 78: Short-term Supply and Demand Balance  136
Figure 79: Medium-term Supply and Demand balance  136 Figure 80: Long-term
Supply and Demand Balance  138 Figure 81: Bangladesh gas transmission system
2016  145 Figure 82: Bangladesh Gas Transmission Pipeline Network Model  148
Figure 83: Short term additional investments  151 Figure 84: Medium term
additional investments  153 Figure 85: High level Long Term Gas Transmission
Plan  155 Figure 86: Pipeline infrastructure in the region  157 Figure 87:
Ongoing JHPL (Red Route) & Future Pipeline Extension to Assam (Blue Route) 159
Figure 88: Feasibility Options for Hook-up  160 Figure 89: Myanmar – Bangladesh
– India pipeline connection possibility  162 Figure 90: Possible “Bay of Bengal”
integrated gas transmission system in Euroasia market  163 Figure 91:
Geographical positioning of the upcoming LNG import projects  166 Figure 92:
Floating Storage and Regasification Unit illustration  167 Figure 93: Floating
Storage and Regasification Unit illustration  168 Figure 94: Cyclone in Bay of
Bengal  170 Figure 95: Existing institutional setup  175 Figure 96: Flow of gas
and money in the gas sector in Bangladesh  176 Figure 97: Wholesale gas prices
by country,  180 Figure 98: Gas Tariff for key customer classes,   181 Figure
99: Historical India gas demand break-Up  210 Figure 100: Future India gas
demand break-Up  210 Figure 101: LNG terminals India  211 Figure 102: EWPL Route
Map  213 Figure 103: Gas Transmission Network in India (Existing & Future)  216
Figure 104: Oil and Gas Basins in Vietnam  225 Figure 105: Circle of
Sustainability  229 Table of Contents: beds: Page: 119 VII Table 35: Operation
Cost Comparison between FSRU and Land-based LNG Terminal  171 Table 36: Time
Schedule for Large Scale FSRU Construction  172 Table 37: Time Schedule for
Land-based LNG Terminal Construction  173 Table 38: Natural Gas Tariff June 2017
179 Table 39: Gas price breakdown 2017 tariff (USD/Mcf)  182 Table 40: Actual
price of gas, Marginal Value Product and Willingness to Pay for gas, 2011  183
Table 41: Historical Primary Energy Consumption per Capita  196 Table 42:
Historical Bangladesh Statistics - Macro Factors  196 Table 43: Historical
Bangladesh Statistics - Gas Sector  197 Table 44: Historical Bangladesh
Statistics - Ln(GDP) and Ln(Gas Demand)  197 Table 45: Historical Bangladesh
Statistics - Power Sector Mix  198 Table 46: Forecasts - GDP Growth and Power
198 Table 47: Forecasts - Gas Demand by Sector - Scenario   199 Table 48:
Forecasts - Gas Demand by Franchise Area - Scenario   199 Table 49: Forecasts -
Gas Demand by Sector - Scenario   200 Table 50: Forecasts - Gas Demand by
Franchise Area - Scenario   201 Table 51: Forecasts - Gas Demand by Sector -
Scenario   202 Table 52: Forecasts - Gas Demand by Franchise Area - Scenario
203 Table 53: Forecasts - Gas Supply - Indigenous Production  203 Table 54:
Forecasts - Gas Demand Supply Blance - Scenario  with YTF Success  204 Table 55:
Bangladesh Gas Price Reviews  204 Table 56: World Bank Commodities Price
Forecast (in nominal USD)  205 Table 57: Existing Gas-fired Power Capacity  206
Table 58: Committed New Gas-fired Power Capacity  208 Table 59: Operating
pipelines in India  213 Table 60: Planned Pipelines in India  215 Table 61:
Pipeline input data  217 VIII APPENDICES Appendix : Key Data Tables  196
Appendix : List of Gas Fired Power Plants  206 Appendix : Gas supply via India
209 Appendix : Pipeline input data  217 Appendix : Lessons learned from gas
regulation in other countries  220 Appendix : Key petrolleum fiscal terms for
production sharing contracts in Myanmar  236 Appendix : BERC License Regulations
and Funding  237 Appendix : Feasibility studies of current projects  238
Appendix : Recent Developments in Bangladesh’ LNG imports  240 Appendix 10:
Questionnaire on gas field exploration, development, operation and production
augmentation for bangladesh  241 Appendix 11: List of Key References  244  of
244  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY This executive summary follows the outline of the report
by first outlining the demand projections and quantifying the unmet demand
Secondly, this executive summary summarises the findings from the domestic gas
supply/production analysis, which shows that any significant increase in
domestic production is not likely to materialise within the next - years In
conclusion, and not surprisingly, in each and every scenario there is  need for
importing gas to Bangladesh both through LNG and pipeline Due to the geography
of Bangladesh however, the locational options for importing LNG are restricted
to the south-eastern part of the country at Moheshkhali Bringing gas from the
south to the north, instead of the other way around, requires new investments in
the gas transmission system The executive summary presents main features and
conclusions from the analysis of the performance of the transmission system
resulting from the derived future demand and supply situation Finally, the
summary presents suggestions to the legal and regulatory framework, changes
which would support  positive development in domestic gas production,
facilitation of LNG imports, and  sustainable development of the transmission
system Demand for gas in Bangladesh – large unmet demand During the last decade,
the gas production and consumption has doubled to ,750 MMCFD The demand is even
higher as there is  large unmet demand and need for curtailment of supply Our
analyses in the GSMP 2017 show that it is likely that demand will continue to
grow, depending on scenarios and use of other fuels like coal and renewable In
the GSMP 2017, we have analysed three scenarios; : base scenario (similar to
PSMP2016) with focus on self-sufficiency and hereby introduction of coal on
large scale, :  high growth, international oriented scenario with focus on gas,
and : climate scenario, where climate change renewable energy supplement use of
gas on large scale In order to maintain the flexibility and based on comments
received during and after the stakeholder workshop, we use Scenario  as our
basis for the further analysis Figure : Gas demand per sector and per scenario
Bangladesh Gas Demand Forecast by Sector ‐ Scenario  Bangladesh Gas Demand
Forecast by Sector ‐ Scenario  Bangladesh Gas Demand Forecast by Sector ‐
Scenario  14,000 14,000 14,000 CNG CNG CNG Commercial Commercial Commercial
Modified PSMP2016 Climate Change High Growth 12,000 12,000 12,000 Domestic
Domestic Domestic 10,000 10,000 10,000 Industry Industry Industry Fertiliser
Fertiliser Fertiliser ,000 ,000 ,000                Captive Power Captive Power
Captive Power ,000 ,000 ,000 Power Power Power ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ‐ ‐
‐   ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐     Source: Ramboll  of 244 Supply of gas – indigenous
resources, LNG and pipeline gas imports The current indigenous gas production in
Bangladesh is ,754 MMCFD The production level from existing discoveries is
expected to start declining quickly in the next few years However, the majority
of geological areas in the country is still unexplored The Gas Sector Master
Plan Consultants (hereafter the Consultants) believe that there are still large
upsides in the indigenous production in Bangladesh if further exploration
successes can be achieved See charts below Figure : Future potential gas
production Bangladesh Indigenous Production Forecast (Existing Discoveries Only)
Bangladesh Indigenous Production Forecast (Existing + Yet to Find Resources)
,000 ,000           ,500 ,000 YTF ‐ Area  YTF ‐ Area  ,000 ,000 YTF ‐ Area  YTF
‐ Thin Bed/ Accelerated Expl ,500 ,000 YTF ‐ Area  Additional 3P YTF ‐ Area
,000 ,000 YTF ‐ Area  Additional 2P YTF ‐ Area  Existing Fields Additional 3P
500 ,000 Additional 2P Existing Fields     -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -     Source: GEUS, Ramboll The Consultants
believe that, even at P90 level, the Yet-to-Find (YTF) resources in Bangladesh
is as large as 34 tcf –  significant volume that could almost double Bangladesh’
current production level if all geological areas are to be explored and
developed properly This in turn will reduce the total cost of gas to Bangladesh,
hence the financial burden for the country would be significantly reduced
comparing to paying higher prices for imported gas For example, we estimate
that, in  USD 60/bbl global long-term oil price environment, the net cost of
indigenous gas production in Bangladesh ranges from USD0 to USD5/mcf This is
lower than potential imported gas from Myanmar USD  to USD /mcf, LNG from the
spot market (in the next few years only) USD  to USD /mcf, and long-term
contracted LNG USD  to USD 10/mcf, see Figure  below  of 244 Figure : Net cost
of supply by geological area at USD 60/bbl environment Source: Ramboll In order
to capture this significant production potential in Bangladesh, rigorous
exploration and development programmes as well as adequate resources and time
are required Firstly, additional gas can be extracted from thin-bed resources as
well as deeper prospects so that gas can easily be tied-in to existing
infrastructure for early production BAPEX has already planned to drill  large
number of exploration wells within the next few years The Consultants understand
the urgency of such exploration programme in order to make quick discoveries and
sustain current production level However, we recommend Bangladesh to allow
itself more time for in-depth and structured & preparatory work, as this will
improve both the likelihood and the size of the discoveries As large geological
areas in Bangladesh remain unexplored, we recommend  systematic and risk based
approach for Bangladesh’ exploration and development programmes in order to best
utilise its resources Priorities should be given to better known areas (eastern
Bangladesh) and then gradually move to more frontier areas (western Bangladesh)
As the future & of indigenous gas becomes increasingly larger and challenging,
it requires systematic capacity building and the strengthening of human
resources in Petrobangla and its subsidiaries We recommend relevant authorities
to give adequate managerial and financial support for such development We also
recommend Bangladesh to invest in multi-client and open seismic surveys in
preparation for future bidding rounds Gas prospects in Bangladesh can be made
more attractive to international applicants when processed and open data
packages are made available  of 244 We understand that Petrobangla and relevant
authorities have been adjusting its upstream fiscal regimes in order to attract
IOCs for Bangladesh’ offshore blocks We support such adjustments and believe
further engagements with IOCs are  key to unlock these technically challenging
resources in offshore areas From  financial prospective, it could still be
rewarding for Bangladesh to invest more in its indigenous gas potentials, if
there are not enough IOC investments Looking at this in context, if long-term
contracted LNG costs Bangladesh around USD10/mmbtu at ex-regasification
terminal, the purchase of LNG at 800mmcf/ (3tcf/yr) will cost over USD3 billion
for  single year Such amount of money could be used to finance large exploration
and development programmes both onshore and offshore, where significant yet-to-
find potentials are expected In short, we believe that there is still
significant potential in Bangladesh’ indigenous gas production, and it should be
given high importance and explored properly The scale of future & success will
determine the level of gas required from foreign sources, through LNG and
pipeline gas Figure : Examples of import requirements as  function of upstream
successes Bangladesh Gas Demand & Supply Forecast ‐ with Further Upstream
Success Bangladeshg Gas Demand & Supply Forecast ‐ No Further Upstream Success
,000      ,000      Demand ‐ Scenario  Demand ‐ Scenario  ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000
,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 Import Requirement ‐ High ,000 ,000 Import
Requirement ‐ Low ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 Additional 2P & 3P Additional 2P & 3P
Existing Fields Existing Fields     -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -     Source: Ramboll Bangladesh has already taken some
very encouraging steps in increasing gas supply through LNG imports Two FSRUs
namely Excelerate and Summit are scheduled to be in operation in mid- 2018 and
end 2018 respectively, while future LNG receiving terminals are under
consideration At the time of writing, Bangladesh is in an advanced stage of
negotiating an LNG contract with Qatar The GSMP Consultant supports Bangladesh’
decision in purchasing significant volumes of LNG, and recommends further import
capacity through both connections to existing India LNG terminals and  third LNG
terminal in Bangladesh within the next few years in order to satisfy the unmet
demand for gas in the country Often, long-term LNG contracts to Asia are linked
to oil price, while the spot LNG price is likely to be kept low up to 2020 due
to the oversupply situation in the global market; hence, spot LNG is likely to
offer more competitive prices during this period Therefore, the Consultants
recommend  of 244 Bangladesh to import maximum quantity of LNG as its
infrastructure allows, with majority of the LNG to be purchased from the spot
market while small quantity from long-term contracts, creating  price and risk
adjusted portfolio However, the oversupply situation in the global LNG market
may start to change after 2020, which in turn affects the price differentials in
spot LNG and long-term contracted LNG The Consultants therefore recommend
Bangladesh to keep fine tuning the balance of its LNG portfolio to minimise its
spending Bangladesh can also consider entering joint LNG purchase contracts with
its neighbour countries ( India) in order to strengthen its negotiation power on
LNG prices Meanwhile, the need for LNG in the longer term is inherently
uncertain, and the scale of LNG requirement will largely depend on the outcome
of the exploration of indigenous gas resources in Bangladesh as well as the
availability of pipeline gas from foreign countries,  Myanmar, Turkmenistan and
Iran Therefore, the Consultants recommend that Bangladesh’ gas supply mix
strategy and consequently infrastructure plan to be reviewed and adjusted
periodically in response to the evolving conditions Albeit  challenging task,
the Consultants strongly recommend Petrobangla and relevant Bangladesh
authorities to pursuit pipeline gas from foreign countries mentioned above The
success of such pursuit will not only enhance the security of supply for
Bangladesh, but also bring down the overall cost of gas imports and strengthen
Bangladesh’ negotiation power in the international market It also needs to be
mentioned that there are strong competitions for the said pipeline gas,
especially gas from Myanmar Petrobangla and relevant Bangladesh authorities are
therefore strongly recommended to (re)start the dialogs swiftly Bangladesh can
also consider acquiring interests in projects from where it imports its gas as
favourable acquisition costs can be achieved under the current oil price This
could also help to hedge against possible high oil and LNG prices in the future,
as Bangladesh would be buying gas from its own oversea assets Transmission
infrastructure – investments in large diameter pipelines needed flow gas from
south to north The gas transmission system in Bangladesh will need to change to
accommodate the increase in demand and the need for imports Specifically, the
flow direction which is currently from the North to the South will need to
change as most of the new supplies, LNG, offshore production; connection with
Myanmar will be brought in from the south  of 244 The current gas transmission
system1 has been modelled in Pipeline Studio investigating the ability to
deliver gas to the  franchise areas of the country The modelling was done for
the years 2021 (short term) and 2031 (medium term) In the short term, the demand
for gas is expected to increase moderately in all franchise areas In the medium
term, 14 years from today (2017),  large increase in gas demand is expected The
developments in the franchise areas are presented below in Figure  Figure :
Demand in franchise areas in scenario  Gas Demand (mmcfd) ‐ Scenario  ,000 PGCL
JGTDSL 316 ,000 873 ,000 BGDCL 939 236 651 ,000 SGCL 948 ,000 700 KGDCL ,190 171
473 508 514 708 ,000 141 391 420 424 533 888 ,000 644 TGTDCL ,000 ,081 ,045 ,210
,000 ,827 ‐ FY2016‐17 FY2020‐21 FY2030‐31 FY2040‐41 Source: Ramboll SHORT TERM
(2021) TRANSMISSION SYSTEM DEVELOPMENTS – FOCUS ON CONNECTION TO INDIA The first
key finding in the short term is that with the transmission system as 2021 there
will be challenges in meeting demand with  potential short fall of around 500
MMCFD Theoretically, this shortfall could be spread out over the entire country;
however, realistically, the shortfall in gas will be felt mostly at the end of
the transmission system specifically in Khulna in the Sundarban region, as gas
either from the south east or from the north east would have to be transported
across the country to reach the west If this area is prioritised at the expense
of another area, the Elenga compressor station would have to be turned on The
best solution for resolving the potential shortfall in volumes and corresponding
transmission capacity has been identified and comprises of  pipeline from India
(connection at Khulna), an additional 3rd LNG terminal in south east at
Moheshkhali and  large onshore pipeline connection Moheshkhali to the west of
the country via  system loop with pipelines from Langlband to Khulna  Current
system defined as current system (2017)+all ongoing projects + all proposed
investments by GTCL until 2021 – Table 24 and Table 25  of 244 The GSMP
Consultant recommends the pipeline from India to Khulna as this connection will
increase system stability, security of supply, and strengthen the bargaining
position of Bangladesh towards external suppliers Given the supply and demand
situation in 2021, we recommend  third LNG terminal at Moheshkhali which will
trigger  need for additional transmission capacity from Moheshkhali It can be
argued whether this should be an offshore or onshore pipeline solution Ideally,
from  technical perspective, we would recommend the offshore pipeline; however,
this will take more time to plan and execute It is also most likely that the
onshore pipeline can be completed in the short term, and therefore given the
urgency required for meeting the short-term demand capacity, it is recommended
to pursue the onshore solution first The onshore solution also has the advantage
that it can be built in sections and that investment money largely stays within
the country However, the offshore pipeline is still to be required in the
mid/long term strategy, hence it is recommended to start feasibility studies
immediately for this Figure : Short-term additional investments Source: Ramboll
The second key finding of the short-term modelling is that if the India
connection is not built, more volumes and capacity are needed, which will need
to come from the south east at Moheshkhali with  4th LNG terminal (triggered by
the additional volumes) With the current plans for LNG the 4th terminal is
likely to be  land based terminal – in that case reaching completion by 2021
will be difficult Alternatively, the volumes could be secured by connecting the
transmission system with Myanmar (also from the south east); however, we also
doubt this can realistically be achieved by In any case, (Myanmar or  4th LNG)
the transmission capacity would need to be expanded  of 244 System optimisation
and usage of existing compressor stations Finally, depending on the exact
delivery demands and supply locations, it may be beneficial to lower the
pressure at Ashuganj/Muchai compressor station in order to help the gas flow
from the south east of the country to the west  more detailed study is required
to definitively determine this Prepare the system for future growth – exploit
economies of scale It will be essential for the supply of gas to the west that
the 30”  45 km pipeline Kutumbopur – Meghnaghat and the 30”  140 km Langolbad –
Gopalgonj pipelines are constructed We recommend  higher capacity of the
pipelines (36”) to accommodate future growth in gas demand We would also
recommend connecting Gopalgonj and Khulna to complete the first step of the
transmission backbone also creating  system loop The connection would serve as
an important part of the major transmission backbone of the country and
facilitate further expansions and connections of power plants Without these
investments, the ELENGA compressor must be turned on to supply the west of the
country with 500 MMCFD Looking at demand post 2021, it quickly becomes evident
that the pipelines suggested by GTCL are undersized to carry the volume further
in the system Thus, at this stage, we recommend installing larger dimensions
pipelines to accommodate future demand Of course, for pipelines where materials
have already been purchased or even installed this might prove to be  challenge
In these cases, we suggest to carry on as is Short term gas transmission network
development – 2021 Based on the pipeline studio modelling combined with the need
for gas transmission in the long term, the Consultants’ recommendations for the
short-term network development will be the following pipelines and compressor
stations in addition to the projects already under construction Table : Gas
transmission projects – short term up to 2021 Type Length Diameter Diameter
CAPEX Finished GTCL Ramboll Cost km Inch inch USD Million  Moheshkhali-Anowara
Parallel 79 42 42 140 2018  Kutumbopur-Meghnaghat Parallel 45 30 36 175 2021
Parallel 12 36 20 2021  Bangobandhu (Railway) Bridge Section  Langolband-Maowa
45 30 60 2021  Gopalgonj to Khulna New 90 30 42 200 2021 East-West  Bogra-
Rangpur-Nilphamari Parallel 160 20 30 160 2021  of 244  Moheshkhali – Dhaka
Region 320 48 2021 480  India- Khulna New 70 36 2021 150 Various smaller
pipelines for New and 150 30 2017- 180 connection of power plants parallel 2021
@ 30 km Compressor 2021 50 Meter station India 2021 30 SCADA 40 Total 1685
Source: GTCL, Ramboll MEDIUM TERM (2031) TRANSMISSION SYSTEM MODELLING – SURGE
IN DEMAND REQUIRES COMPLETION OF THE MAJOR TRANSMISSION SYSTEM BACKBONE The
medium term (2031) has been modelled building upon the infrastructure included
in the short term and the connection to India at Khulna In between 2021 and
2031, we project an increase in demand from approximately 4500 MMCFD to just
above 6500 MMCFD On the domestic supply side, we would expect that some &
results have been achieved between 2021 and 2031 increasing the domestic
production from 3000 MMCFD to 4800 MMCFD; however, these are uncertain figures
and do of course rely on following the recommendations on the & The import
capacity has been set to allow up to 500 MMCFD from India (connection at Khulna)
From the south east, we allow up to 2000 MMCFD We do, however, on purpose not
specify the source of the volumes from the south east as these can be achieved
from either additional LNG, from Myanmar or from offshore domestic production
Time will show how these sources develop in feasibility and we find that keeping
the flexibility to adjust is important and prudent Large scale transmission
capacity from Moheshkhali onshore and offshore required to facilitate import
Regardless of the source of the gas volumes from the south east, we find that in
order to meet the gas demand in the Titas, Pashchimanchal and Sundarban regions,
the following projects must be completed: Offshore Pipeline between Moheshkhali
and the “Langolbad – Gopalgonj/Khulna pipeline” We recommend  36”  150 km
offshore pipeline and  42”  150 onshore between Moheshkhali and the Langolbad –
Gopalgonj/Khulna pipeline The actual routing of the pipeline will have to be
adjusted to connection points to power plants and other large consumers as well
as to right-of- way and environmental constraints The connection will apart from
evacuating the gas form south east at Moheshkhali, strengthen security of supply
not only in the western part of the country but in fact help the entire country
as dependence on the narrow onshore corridor is reduced To facilitate the
transport further in the system, it is necessary that the diameter of the
connecting Langolbad – Gopalgonj/Khulna pipeline is 36” 10 of 244 Figure :
Medium term additional investments Source: Ramboll Hatikumrul - Langolbad –
Gopalgonj/Khulna pipelines As part of the backbone from south east to north
west, we recommend that the offshore pipeline is continued (36”  120 km) further
to Hatikumrul in the north-western part of the country The routing should
preferably follow the existing transmission system Finally, one intermediate
compressor station is potentially required between Moheshkhali and Dhaka
detailed study is required to definitively determine this Medium term gas
transmission network development The investments in the medium term will depend
on the actual development of the indigenous gas production However, in all
cases, we foresee the need to strengthen the gas supply from the LNG import
facilities and/or Myanmar, which is the nearest country with surplus gas
production Based on the pipeline studio modelling combined with the view of long
term use of the gas transmission, the following investments are proposed The
actual of implementation will need to be adjusted as the market develops Also,
we have an underground gas storage in the period to allow for market integration
and system balance This can facilitate import of gas but also ensure security of
gas supply,  better utilisation of LNG terminals and possible transit of gas
from Myanmar to India 11 of 244 Table  : Transmission projects in the medium
term to 2031 Type Length Diameter Diameter Cost Finished GTCL Ramboll  Myanmar
Inter 50 36 2022  Moheshkhali – West 150 36 2026 300 Bangladesh offshore
pipeline  Maheshkhali – West 150 42 250 2026 Bangladesh onshore pipeline
Hatikumrul - [Langolbad – 120 36 180 2026 Gopalgonj/Khulna pipelines]
Compressor 50 2026  Underground gas storage 200 2026- 2028 Various smaller
pipelines for 2022- New and 150 30 180 connection of power plants 2031 parallel
@ 30 km Total investment from 2022 to 960 2031 Source: Ramboll LONG TERM (2041)
TRANSMISSION SYSTEM MODELLING – UNCERTAINTY AHEAD FOCUS ON FLEXIBILITY AND
KEEPING OPTIONS OPEN The situation in 2041 has so much uncertainty about the
actual gas production, import via LNG and pipelines, as well as the actual
location of gas consumption Therefore, the GSMP Consultant has decided not to
further attempt to get the model to converge for this year but instead envisions
the design of  flexible system, which will be able to adapt to most of the
uncertainty by creating  strong backbone of the gas transmission system from the
LNG import terminals, south of Dhaka and further to the Western part of the
country As the import of gas supply increases, the indigenous gas production
will increasingly be used close to the gas production or cease to exist in This
situation may result in an operation where the pressure in the system close to
production can be some lowered and perhaps even the flows reversed Further to
the gas transportation,  system with large diameter pipelines will also be able
to provide additional line pack flexibility to ensure gas demand variations
during the day To further increase flexibility and as back up for LNG supply in
case of severe weather conditions, the Consultants also recommend converting an
existing gas field to underground gas storage 12 of 244 Figure : High level Long
Term Gas Transmission Plan2 Source: Ramboll Post 2031, the GSMP Consultant
estimates that there could be possibilities to get Turkmen/Iranian gas if the
TAPI pipeline is constructed Thus, an additional connection to India at Rangpur
in the north is envisaged The connection should also enable bidirectional flow
allowing potential excess production from Myanmar to transit through Bangladesh
to India The length of the backbone from the Myanmar to the Indian border is
approx 500 km It is recommended to develop this as  large diameter pipeline,
even if such diameter is only required in the longer term to avoid investing in
small diameter pipelines In general, the system in Bangladesh has so short
pipelines that intermediate compression is only necessary in few cases to ensure
sufficient flow  One intermediate compressor station between Moheshkhali and
Dhaka – location suggested at Feni  Compressor station could be combined with
offshore underground gas storage Sangu field – the feasibility of this should of
course be investigated before any decision, to date we are not aware of any
relevant studies  Border station Myanmar  Border station India (Khulna)  Gas
field compression – in particular when fields are being depleted In addition to
line compressor stations, there may be need for field compressor stations when
the production pressure becomes lower than the needed pipeline pressure By using
increased  The map shows the general envisioned back bone required for the long
term plan of the network Exact sizes and routings should be studied further in
feasibility studies but it is recommended at least one 42” pipeline connects the
south east to the north west of the country and as large as possible pipelines
should be implemented 13 of 244 volumes close to the gas fields, it may be
possible to lower the operational pressure of the pipelines closed to production
Long term gas transmission investments The long-term investments from 2032 to
2041 are difficult to break down into actual projects However, some of the
investments will include at least one large diameter pipeline extra from the LNG
import point to Dhaka and further to the west as shown in Figure  Table : Long
term pipeline investments Type Length Diameter Diameter Cost Finished GTCL
Ramboll  Moheshkhali – Dhaka Region 250 56 560 2034  Dhaka region – Rangpur 300
48 580 2036  India (Rengpur)  Various smaller pipelines to 400 30 480 2032 to
power plants – 10 @40 km 2041  Compressor 2036 50  New SCADA 50 Total investment
from 2032 to 950 1720 2041 Source: Ramboll The actual routing of the large
diameter pipeline will have to be adjusted to connection points to power plants
and other large consumers as well as to right-of-way and environmental
constraints 14 of 244 LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK – LOOKING AHEAD PRICING OF
LNG IMPORTS NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED The demand and supply balance and the
corresponding transmission plan clearly highlight the need for import from
neighbouring countries by pipeline and LNG Thus, Bangladesh is becoming
connected to the world market and world market gas prices The costs of imports
will be higher than the current cost of indigenous gas production The legal and
regulatory part of this project focuses in particular on how Bangladesh may
handle this situation Current practice Today’ gas market structure can be
characterised as  single-buyer model with  complex system of administered
internal transfer prices Petrobangla acquires gas from IOCs at PSC contract
prices, mixes it with its own gas from subsidiaries, then other subsidiaries
transmit and distribute it to their customers In other words, the Government is
allocating gas to consumers and administering  bundled gas price set by BERC
Bundled prices, which do not differentiate between the price of gas as
commodity and the cost of transmission and distribution, have some undesirable
implications, such as: lead to inefficient pricing,   do not show financial
viability of the various segments production, transmission, and distribution,
and result in cross-subsidies  However, since 2014, Bangladesh' gas price has
gone up by almost USD /MMBTU There has been  sharp increase in the price paid by
CNG users, commercial, captive power and domestic metered gas consumption We
suggest  -step approach in introducing LNG Figure : Gas Price reviews – consumer
groups 1600    /     CNG 1400 1200 1000 800 Commercial 600 Domestic Captive
Power Industry 400 200 Power Fertiliser  Source: Petrobangla Annual reports,
BERC Public Notice for Gas Tariff, 2017 15 of 244 STEP : MAINTAIN BUNDLED PRICES
IN THE SHORT TERM From 2018, LNG will be imported at higher costs than the
current gas purchases from PSCs and Petrobangla subsidiaries, at current oil
prices this would be - USD/MMBTU This will necessitate an increase in the gas
tariff in the short term Despite the undesirable effects of the single buyer
model, our recommendation is to keep this current model3 in the short term up to
2021 while import volumes are not very significant In the medium term (post
2021), it is not recommended to keep this model, as it would continue cross-
subsidies, inefficient allocation of resources and distorted pricing and
potentially reduce the economic growth rate in the medium and long term STEP :
FROM 2022 INTRODUCE DUAL MARKETS FOR GAS TO PROTECT THE DOMESTIC MARKET WHILE
INTRODUCING MARKET BASED PRICES FOR THE MOST EFFICIENT AND CREDITWORTHY USERS
Several countries, Egypt and Pakistan amongst others, have introduced LNG into
their markets at world market prices while protecting key customers not able to
pay the full price It is recommended to learn from the experiences made in
particular with respect to how world market LNG was phased in In that respect,
the key learning is that the establishment of two markets for gas seems to be
the most viable approach to introduce higher priced LNG  dual market in
Bangladesh is characterised by: ) the current low priced gas supplied by
Petrobangla subsidiaries to their customers at regulated prices, and )  market
for new gas supply at (higher) market prices to customers willing to pay the
higher price to get gas supply LNG importers could be government–owned companies
(Petrobangla, Power Cell) or private, selling gas at unregulated prices to
customers willing to pay the price  key issue is to determine the customers
willing and able to pay  higher price to get gas supplied by new LNG imports
STEP : THE END GOAL IS  COMPETITIVE MARKET WITH GAS TO GAS COMPETITION –
REGULATED AND UNREGULATED MARKETS TO MERGE IN THE MEDIUM TO LONG TERM It must be
noted that dual markets as described and recommended above should not be seen as
permanent solutions In time, with the pipeline connections to India and Myanmar,
the conditions for gas to gas competition will be present and the market should
be allowed to move towards one price The dual market solution does indeed allow
for such  gradual transition to  more competitive gas market As domestic gas
production from existing fields continue to fall over time and higher cost
supply from new fields increase over time, domestic regulated prices and
unregulated prices will converge  Petrobangla acquires LNG imports, gas from
IOCs at PSC contract prices, mixes it with its own gas from subsidiaries, then
transmits the gas and distributes it to its customers through GTCL and
distribution companies 16 of 244  ROAD MAP AND RECOMMENDATIONS The road map for
developing the gas sector into  direction where domestic production is
maximised, infrastructure is developed and import is facilitated, consists of
number of decisions and uncertainties Below in Figure 10 the main events,
investments, and decisions are outlined for the following areas: domestic
production, legal and regulatory and infrastructure Priority number  is to
initiate the needed programs within & Since the results and success of these
programs will only be known - years from today, it is important to initiate this
now In 2023, we expect that the industry and government will have  much deeper
knowledge of how much additional production can be expected Priority number  is
to initiate the technical and economic studies of the optimal solution for
bringing additional gas from Moheshkhali to the Dhaka region This will minimise
the risk for bottlenecks in the system We expect at least  LNG import terminals
in the south east The current transmission capacity is not enough to move this
to the rest of the country Priority number  is the approach to LNG pricing and
inclusion into the gas market In the early years , we recommend bundling the
price to allow for  gradual transition to dual markets where selected customers
receive gas at higher prices and higher certainty In these years, we recommend
preparing key elements of the market opening That means ensuring that third
parties can access the transmission network and that the infrastructure
ownership is separated from the trading activities on the distribution level We
estimate that if the vision of  competitive gas market should come true in 2024,
work needs to start 2017 by updating and in some cases developing the sector
legislation 17 of 244 Figure 10: Overall roadmap COMPREHENSIVE & PROGRAMMES
START INDIGENOUS PRODUCTION KNOWLEDGE - ADDITIONAL LNG INITIATE MOHESKALI-DHAKA
PIPELINE STUDIES ONSHORE 48" PIPELINE - MOHESKALI- DHAKA OFFSHORE 36" PIPELINE
MOHESKALI- DHAKA TURKMENISTAN/IRAN GAS LNG - SUMMIT LNG - 3RD TERMINAL 2017 2018
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 LNG - EXALERATE
MYANMAR GAS (PIPELINE 36") INDIA LNG (PIPELINE KHULNA 36") PIPELINE INDIA
(RENGPUR) REGULATORY STEP : MIXED MARKET PRICING REGULATORY STEP : DUAL MARKET
STARTUP REGULATORY STEP : MARKET OPENING (UNBUNDLING+TPA) Source: Ramboll 18 of
244 INDIGENOUS GAS PRODUCTION In order to capture the significant production
potential in Bangladesh, rigorous exploration and development programmes as well
as adequate resources and time are required Firstly, additional gas can be
extracted from thin-bed resources as well as deeper prospects, such gas can then
easily be tied-in to existing infrastructure for early production –first gas can
be expected between Year 2018 and BAPEX has also planned to drill  large number
of exploration wells within the next few years The Consultants understand the
urgency of such exploration programme in order to make quick discoveries and
sustain current production level However, we recommend Bangladesh to allow
itself more time for in-depth and structured & preparatory work, as this will
improve both the likelihood and the size of the discoveries As large geological
areas in Bangladesh remain unexplored, we recommend  systematic and risk based
approach for Bangladesh’ exploration and development programmes to best utilise
its resources Priorities should be given to better known areas (eastern
Bangladesh) and then gradually move to more frontier areas (western Bangladesh)
Key years will be  where the outcome of the seismic and & work will be known, if
unsuccessful decisions on for example additional LNG will have to be taken in
these years As the future & of indigenous gas becomes increasingly larger and
challenging, it requires systematic capacity building and the strengthening of
human resources in Petrobangla and its subsidiaries We recommend relevant
authorities to give adequate managerial and financial support for such
development 19 of 244 Table : Indigenous gas production Source: GEUS 20 of 244
INFRASTRUCTURE – ACTION PLAN Infrastructure action plan is in the short to
medium term focuses  areas ) secure the necessary transmission capacity from
Moheshkhali to the Dhaka region ) develop cross border connections with India
and Myanmar in the short and medium term respectively ) develop the internal
transmission system to avoid bottlenecks from east to west Further development
of transmission capacity from the south east to the central and western part of
the country can and should be done both onshore and offshore Since there is
need for evacuating gas from the south east at Moheshkhali, we recommend
starting with the onshore pipeline It has been scheduled for 2021 – this
ambitious completion would potentially stretch into 2022 depending on the level
of challenges and obstacles with key issues such as right of way The offshore
pipeline will require more time, and we estimate that it at the earliest can be
operational by In both cases, the decision to undertake the necessary studies
must be taken in 2017 in order not to lose time To increase system reliability,
diversification, and bargaining power, we recommend connecting with India
(Khulna) in 2021 and Myanmar in Failure to connect with India will imply
shortage of gas in the western part of Bangladesh The connection with Myanmar we
believe should be pursued regardless of the developments on indigenous gas
production The transmission system will have to be upgraded in order to
transport the volumes from the landing point in the south east to the rest of
the system We strongly recommend increasing diameter size whenever possible in
order to prepare the system for future growth and to exploit economies of scale
Often this means installing 36” pipelines instead of 30” We estimate that the
year of 2023 marks  decisive year for gas infrastructure investment By then, it
should be known whether the & programs described previously have been successful
or not Lack of success would necessitate further import most likely as LNG
unless additional amounts and flexibility exists in India and Myanmar 21 of 244
Figure 11: Infrastructure action plan 22 of 244 LEGAL AND REGULATORY ACTION PLAN
The action plan for the legal and regulatory analysis gives recommendations as
to how to accommodate the higher LNG prices, open the market to competition and
update the regulatory framework within the upstream sector The key challenge is
the treatment of LNG in the short run, establishing the infrastructure and
ensuring the smooth flow of gas from the terminals is  challenge in itself and
requires time and adaptation Thus, we do not recommend implementing the dual
markets overnight  preparation period of - years is suggested to prepare the
market, hereunder determining which customers should be eligible for higher
prices Meanwhile in the period , we recommend continuing the current practise of
pooling/mixing the prices, although not optimal it may very well be the only
option which is implementable in the short term This implies that unless the
State is covering the increased costs of purchasing gas, prices will increase
for consumers The distribution of these price increases is at the end of the day
political decision Dual markets should also be seen as  transition As domestic
gas production from existing fields continue to fall over time and higher cost
supply from new fields increase over time, domestic regulated prices and
unregulated prices will converge Two preconditions for the above development
exist, ) changes to the current legal and regulatory environment and )
development of infrastructure The changes to the legal and regulatory framework
must be focused on two separate areas:  Provision of third party access to the
network: third party access could in the future be beneficial to Bangladesh and
could support on opening of the markets by allowing suppliers and producers to
supply directly to consumers and retailers This requires enhancement of the
responsibilities of BERC regarding tariff determination and licensees for the
various functions within the gas market Finally, the network code for the
transmission system must be developed This will determine the rules and access
conditions for third parties, the financial requirements, etc  Unbundling of
distribution companies and transfers of ownership of all existing transmission
infrastructure to GTCL; We recommend in the medium term to address the ownership
of assets in Bangladesh Currently, some transmission assets are owned by the
distribution companies, we recommend transferring this to GTCL Meanwhile, to
avoid conflict of interest we recommend to legally unbundle the distribution
companies into an infrastructure owner and  trading/supply company The
development of infrastructure is outlined in the previous section With respect
to the impact on the regulatory changes, it is important to highlight that the
opening of the market must go hand in hand with the infrastructure developments
In particular pipeline developments as this enables competition between
different gas sources 23 of 244 Table : Legal & regulatory action plan 2017 2018
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 LEGAL & REGULATORY
Gas Rationing -Review gas utilization guidelines Review Decide -Allocate more
gas to power and fertiliser sectors Allocate Pricing -Mix higher priced LNG and
lower priced domestic gas Mix Mix Mix -Introduce dual markets for gas Plan
Decide Prepare Prepare -Determine eligible customers to buy gas directly from
suppliers Plan Plan Plan Identify Dual market  Implementation of competitive gas
markets  -Increase the gas price to customers willing to pay  higher price Plan
Decide Prepare Prepare Opening gas market -Update BERC Act for tariff
methodology Plan Implement -Update BERC' License Regulations Plan Implement
-Enhance BERC' regulatory capabilities on TPA Decide Draft Implement -Develop
Licenses for import of gas (LNG) Draft Implement -Develop Licenses for
transmission, shipping and sale of gas Decide Draft Draft Agree Award licenses
-Develop Network code for transmission Decide Plan Draft Draft Agree & Implement
-Distribution Companies -Transfer all transmission assets to GTCL Decide
Implement -Licenses for distribution, shipping and marketing of gas Plan Plan
Plan Draft Draft Draft Agree Award licenses -Legally separate marketing and
distribution of gas in Distribution Companies Plan Plan Plan Draft Draft Draft
Agree Separate -Network code distribution Plan Plan Plan Draft Draft Draft Agree
Implement Upstream -Establish Independent Upstream Regulator Decide Plan Draft
Draft Agree & Implement -Regulator to manage bidding rounds and granting PSCs
Decide Plan Implement Source: Ramboll 24 of 244  INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT OF THE
PROJECT  Background This Gas Sector Master Plan 2017 is an update of the 2006
plan which was prepared for the time horizon up to the year The primary aim of
the present GSMP 2017 is to update the GSMP2006 to align it with Bangladesh’
current infrastructure development priorities and guide the development of the
sector through In this context, coordination has been carried out with the Power
Sector Master Plan 2016 and the team behind it However, assumptions and
scenarios are different than in the PSMP2016, not least due to the dramatic
change in international gas prices, in wake of the decline in oil prices in late
Natural Gas is the principal source of commercial energy which accounts for
about 79% primary commercial energy supply in the country It is used for
generation of electricity, manufacturing of urea fertiliser, industrial,
commercial and domestic purposes and also for burning of bricks, tea processing
and as fuel for CNG operated vehicles In Fiscal Year , Share of gas based on
installed generation capacity (MW) is 69% and share of gas based on net energy
generation (MkWh) is 33% The number of discovered gas fields in the country is
The total reserve of recoverable (Proven + Probable) gas is 12 TCF and  total of
38 TCF gas had been produced up to December 2016, net remaining reserve is 74
TCF on January Presently, 20 gas fields are in production producing in aggregate
at  rate of about ,750 MMCFD The Government of Bangladesh has  vision to become
middle-income country by 2021 and  developed country by 2041, and it is one of
the fast-growing economies in the Asian region Its GDP is growing at  rate
higher than % per annum Dependable supply of energy at affordable cost is
precondition for sustainable growth With fast paced growth and uplift in the
standard of living, demand for energy is growing rapidly in Bangladesh The
purpose of the GSMP 2017 is to provide  strategic technical plan for the long-
term development of the gas sector in Bangladesh The sector faces  critical
point as domestic production is projected to decline and additional supplies
will require increased investment and an opening of the sector to import and
world market prices of gas The primary objective of the GSMP 2017 would be to
identify  possible path for developing additional supply and to lay the
foundations for informed policy making The new GSMP 2017 focuses on:  Gas
demand-supply projection, with the latter based on long-run marginal cost of
supply;  Assessment of Oil & Gas exploration possibilities and development of
road map to enhance Gas reserve;  Gas field development to meet the growing
demand; 25 of 244  Considering the flow patterns from various gas fields to the
demand centres using the existing infrastructure; LNG import facilities;  
Regional gas development and integration of Bangladesh gas system with
neighbouring countries;  Optimising expansion of gas supply and transmission
infrastructure in the medium- and long- term;  Recommendations on changes to
the policy, legal, regulatory and institutional framework required to support
long-term gas development The expected results of the assignment are:  The
study is expected to constitute  medium-term plan for least-cost augmentation of
supply and sustainable development of the gas sector in Bangladesh  Problem
statement Since the GSMP2006, the oil & gas sector has undergone significant
changes globally as well as locally in Bangladesh Global energy prices were
already in 2006 on the rise supported by rising demand and slumps in supply of
oil and gas Figure 12: Historical Energy Prices, USD/mmbtu Source: World Bank
2017 Today, prices of oil and gas have come down and have remained relatively
stable at around 50 USD/bbl The World Bank outlook for 2030 is presented below
showing sustained low prices of gas compared to the past 10 years 26 of 244
Figure 13: World Bank Commodities Price Forecast (in nominal USD) $/BBL $/MT
$/MMBTU Natural gas, Europe Natural gas, US 90 20 Natural gas LNG, Japan Coal,
Australia 18 80 Crude oil, avg 16 70 14 60 12 50 10 40  30  20  10    2015 2016
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2030* Source: World Bank 2017
Several elements are in favour of  prolonged decline in commodity prices First
of all, there is an expectation that the world in the short to medium term will
experience  supply glut of LNG caused by many of the mega projects initiated
during the booming oil and gas years now being finished especially in Australia
Secondly, since the GSMP2006, the United States has undergone  revolution within
its energy sector leading the United States to become an exporter of gas instead
of importer, as was envisaged back in Thirdly, some of the high potential
markets such as the European market are moving away from fossil fuels and will
in the future use less gas than what was anticipated previously Fourthly, recent
events in the Middle East; sanctions being lifted on Iran;   Qatar lifting its
Moratorium on gas exports;  and the coalition of Arab states imposing  ban on
Qatar might push the LNG markets further downwards The changed price picture has
implications for the choices of Bangladesh – especially now when the country is
becoming an importer of LNG Locally in Bangladesh, GDP has been increasing
significantly with year on year growth rates of minimum  % in local real value
since Bangladesh,  self-sufficient country in gas since the 1950’ies has
experienced difficulties in meeting the growing demand for energy, in particular
gas The shortfall in energy has in effect been limiting the economic growth in
the society The reasons for demand outpacing supply are many and should be found
on both the supply and the demand side On the demand side several factors have
facilitated an exceptional growth in energy and gas demand, the most significant
being:  The average growth rate over the period  was % The exponentially
growing GDP has had  direct impact on energy demand 27 of 244  Population
levels have been growing significantly and steady, on average % per annum
Bangladesh’ population in 2016 was estimated to be at million, which is  %
change compared to 2002 where the population was million  Domestic gas pricing:
Offering gas well below economic prices has implied  high demand in some areas
of society The effects of energy subsidies are well-known and have been studied
intensively by IMF and the World Bank; when natural gas prices are subsidised,
it leads to  rapid growth in gas consumption and electricity consumption as gas
is one of the main fuels for power generation Low natural gas prices lead to
underinvestment in the energy sector and even in countries where producers and
transmission and distribution companies (often the National Oil and Gas Company)
are compensated in the state’ fiscal budget, the payment is often not large
enough to invest in new production and infrastructure, resulting in fuel and
electricity shortages When international energy prices go up, energy subsidies
lead to  rapidly rising fiscal burden in gas importing countries Exporting
countries also incur  cost, in the form of foregone revenues that could have
been invested in new infrastructure or other government programs Supply has
entirely been from domestic resources However, the current domestic resources
have not been adequate to supply the energy demands resulting from the growing
population and GDP Several of the major producing fields, originally discovered
back in the 60’ies and 70’ies, are in decline Efforts have been made to increase
supply from domestic production during various licensing rounds; however, the
interest from IOCs has been limited Thus, with GDP and population levels
continuing to expand, the Government has been faced with  limited set of choices
in the short term Initiatives to curb gas demand through regulatory changes and
demand side measures have been initiated, the most significant being increasing
prices and reduction in subsidies and an immediate halt to expansions of the
domestic consumption On the gas sourcing side, efforts to meet the demand for
gas have been concentrated around development of LNG import to the country and
maximising the output from the existing producing fields LNG import is expected
to commence in Thus, Bangladesh faces  number of important choices with respect
to the paths that the country can chose from Continuing the present path with
future declining production, increasing demand, and residual demand to be
covered by imports could have  series of negative consequences to the country,
the most significant are: Lack of gas and energy to meet domestic demand putting
ceiling on economic growth   Significant exposure to international gas and
energy prices implying  high risk of an increased fiscal burden – which the
country cannot afford in the long run  Poor bargaining position vis--vis
suppliers of LNG 28 of 244 Lack of investments in gas sector infrastructure –
increasing the pressure on the current  system  Political and social
instability as  result of the above This report outlines alternative paths and
has concrete and specific recommendations which would support this formulated in
road map for the country  Overview of this final report The Final Report is
divided into the following chapters: chapter  gas demand analysis, where energy
and gas demand is investigated and developed for three different scenarios In
the following chapter , domestic gas supply is addressed In chapter , the
various supply possibilities coupled with demand developments are presented to
present the least cost of supply in the short, medium, and long term Chapter
presents the transmission system of Bangladesh bringing together the previous
chapters in  simple framework that allows illustration and detection of
bottlenecks in the system given the different development paths with Bangladesh
starting to import gas Chapter  presents the cross-border pipeline import
solutions for Bangladesh –  topic which was not analysed in GSMP2006 Chapter
presents the LNG import options and plans Chapter 10 addresses the legal and
regulatory changes needed in order to achieve the least cost solution and
support the development of the sector Changes in the regulatory framework impact
both the demand and the supply 29 of 244  GAS DEMAND  Bangladesh energy sector
current status –  burning challenge  Primary energy consumption compared to peer
countries Bangladesh has been facing  severe challenge of energy shortage In
1994, the primary energy consumption per capita of Bangladesh was only 13 tonne
of oil equivalent (toe) In 2014, this figure increased to 22 toe, still at  low
level comparing to other Asian countries For example, on  per capita basis,
Thailand consumes  times as much primary energy consumption as Bangladesh, see
Figure Figure 14: Primary Energy Consumption per Capita   China
Thailand  Indonesia  India           Pakistan  Myanmar Bangladesh  ‐
Source: World Bank Looking at this in context, Bangladesh’ GDP per capita in
2014 was USD924 (measured at constant 2010 price), similar to that of India in
However, the energy consumption stories of these two countries are very
different India’ primary energy consumption per capita in 2004 was already twice
as large as that of Bangladesh in It can be argued that India has had  high
concentration of coal in its primary energy mix, less energy efficient than gas;
therefore, the difference between Bangladesh and India may be overstated when
looking at primary energy consumption However, the difference in electricity
consumption per capita was 46%, less dramatic yet still significant 30 of 244
Figure 15: Energy Consumption Comparison - Bangladesh vs India vs Thailand
Bangladesh 2014 India 2004 Thailand 2014 ,636 ,566 ,990 311 924 913 223 441 453
GDP per capita (constant 2010 US$) Primary Energy Consumption per capita (kilo
oil eqv) Electricity Consumption per capita (KWh) Source: World Bank According
to Bangladesh’ 7th Five Year Plan, the government has the intention to pursuit
an export-led economic growth model,  strategy that brought rapid GDP growth to
China China became  member of World Trade Organisation (WTO) in 2001, exporting
predominately manufacturing products, and the primary energy consumption per
capita in China has tripled since then This highlights the need for Bangladesh
to secure dramatically more energy in order to support its economic development
plan Bangladesh also has  very high concentration of natural gas in its energy
mix compared to other countries In 2016, natural gas made up 76% of the total
primary energy consumption of Bangladesh, ranking the country number  in the
world for gas penetration This is on the same level as that of Qatar ( major gas
exporter) and twice as high as that of Italy ( gas importing country) 31 of 244
Figure 16: Gas Share in Primary Energy Consumption (excl Biofuel & Waste), 2016
100% 90% 76% 80% Bangladesh ranks #  in the world 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% %
&
Source: BP Statistical Review 2017 Bangladesh’ reliance on gas in its energy mix
is  result of what is available from low cost domestic production, as well as
the lack of development and import of other energy sources Natural gas has been
vital in fuelling Bangladesh’ economic growths over the past few decades,
meanwhile, it is widely recognised that the overall energy supply for the
country is now lagging far behind its economic development The scale of the
energy shortage requires Bangladesh to pursuit  substantial level of imports as
well as diversifications of its energy mix  Developments in primary energy
consumption components In the following the various components of the energy mix
are investigated Gas According to Petrobangla, natural gas consumption in
Bangladesh has increased dramatically from 698 mmcf/ in 1995 to ,645 mmcf/ in
2015, almost  times increase over 20 years 32 of 244 Figure 17: Bangladesh
Historical Gas Consumption ,000      ,500 ,000 ,500 ,000 500 -   -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -     Source:
Petrobangla, Annual report 2015 The power sector has been the biggest consumer
of natural gas, accounting for 41% of total gas consumption in This is followed
by captive power 17%, industry sector 17%, domestic sector 13%, fertiliser
sector %, CNG sector %, and commercial sector % As shown in Figure 18, while
power (grid power), captive power, industry and domestic sectors have increased
their use of gas, the consumption from CNG sector has remained stable and that
of fertiliser has in fact dropped in recent years This is  direct result of the
shortages in gas supply, creating  significant level of unmet demand as will be
showed later on in this report Figure 18: Historical Gas Consumption by Sector
,000      CNG ,500 Commercial ,000 Domestic ,500 Industry (incl Tea & Brick)
Fertilizer ,000 Captive Power 500 Power -   ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐     Source: Petrobangla Annual report
33 of 244 According to the Petrobangla estimates, the gas production capacity in
2016 was ,754MMCFD while the demand is estimated to be ,736MMCFD, about
,000mmscf (27%) daily shortage in supply even if the maximum production is
achieved As  result of such shortage, there is now  severe rationing of gas Even
though priority has been given to the power sector, which has come at the
expense of fertiliser production and growth in CNG gas consumption, the fast-
growing demand for gas in power production has far outstripped gas supply
Historically, natural gas has been the predominant source for power generation
in Bangladesh To meet its growing demand, Bangladesh began importing electricity
from India in September In Fiscal year 2009, about 52% of grid power generation
(net) was gas based, 08% was liquid fuel based, 75% was coal based, and the
remaining 65% was hydro based To meet its growing demand, Bangladesh began
importing electricity from India in October In FY , with competing demands for
gas and constrained supply, according to installed generation capacity, the
share of gas based power to the grid fell to 62% In contrast, the share of oil
based power surged to 29% of the total Meanwhile, hydro and coal based power
both are same as the last year  % The remaining % of grid power supply was
import based The surge in the share of oil based power supply in recent years is
reflection of  major primary fuel constraint in Bangladesh This has contributed
to the rapid increase in the average cost of electricity generation There is
currently neither nuclear nor renewable power supply to the grid However, there
is  substantial level of off-grid power generation from captive power and small
amount from residential solar PV – the exact quantity from these sources are
difficult to estimate, while some studies suggest that the off-grid power could
currently account for around 20% of total Bangladesh power generation Figure 19:
Bangladesh Historical Grid Power Net Energy (excl Captive Power & Solar PV)
Generation 100% 90% 80% 70% Import 60% Hydro 50% Coal 40% Oil 30% Natural Gas
20% 10% %   ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
Source: BPDB NB: numbers are according to the net energy generation 34 of 244
Coal Bangladesh is endowed with rich bituminous coal deposit, with the measured
and probable coal reserves total of ,300 million tons Out of five identified
coal fields, namely Barapukuria, Phulbari, Khalaspir, Dighipara and Jamalganj,
only Barapukuria is currently in production Barapukuria’ measured and probable
reserve is 390 million tons This mine has capacity to produce one million tonnes
per year Coal produced from Barapukuria has good heating value, more than
,072kcal/kg (68MJ/kg) This level of quality coal can be used for coking coal
Currently, the Barapukuria coal is fuelled for the mine-mouth Barapukuria Coal
Power Generation (125 MW  units) and brick kilns Additionally, another unit of
274 MW in Barapukuria is under construction stage However, with such good
heating value, Barapukuria coal could be used for higher energy efficient use,
such as higher efficient coal-fired power plant (Super-critical or Ultra Super
Critical) power plant, or for more energy-intensive industry use such as steel
production (coking coal) Meanwhile, Coal Bed Methane (CBM) feasibility study
project was undertaken to evaluate the methane gas reserve as well as to examine
the commercial viability for extraction of CBM from Jamalganj coal field The
project was completed in December 2016; however, the result of the study was not
satisfactory The Bangladeshi Government has  strong intention to diversify its
power mix and rapidly develop coal-fired power plants Given the present status
of domestic coal, the implementation of these projects will require imported
coal for fuel This will require huge port, rail transport and coal stocking
infrastructure However, so far there is only one ongoing deep-sea port project
in Matarbari Island which will be able to cater ships having 80,000 tonnes
capacity This is currently dedicated for Matarbari Ultra Super Critical Coal-
fired Power Plant In the near future, however, the Government intends to expand
this deep-sea port and develop  coal Centre as “An Energy Hub” for the whole
country According to PSMP2016, the construction of Dighipara coal mine and
Khalashpir coal mines are to be commenced after 2022 and 2027, respectively Coal
shares 35% of total installed power capacity by 2041 as per the PSMP base case,
and the annual imported coal to be expected as much as 60 million ton by the
same year This projection may be revised as the Bangladeshi government
reconsiders its options in response to recent developments in the global energy
sector Oil and petroleum products Bangladesh’ current oil annual demand is
around  million tons, and the self-sufficiency rate is only % The Bangladeshi
Government expects continuous economic development As  result, the industry
sector and transport sector demand will lead drastic oil demand growth;  times
higher in 2041 than in 2016 (average growth rate % ) In FY2014, Bangladesh
Petroleum Corporation imported over  million tons of petroleum products, worth
approximately USD3 billion Out of this, power sector (public and private) 35 of
244 consumed 364 million tons which accounts for % of the total consumption,
communication (transport) sector 472 million tons  %, and agriculture 929
million  % Bangladesh has several plans to extend or newly develop oil
refineries; however, if the oil demand grows as projected, oil imports will be
mandatory to meet the demand and keep increasing LPG In many countries, LPG is
precursor fuel in new areas The introduction of LPG allows the market for gas to
develop, substituting for other fuels, such as biomass By increasing demand for
gas prior to the introduction of  network, the market is developed at  lower
cost and at  lower risk than if  distribution network is installed upfront and
the market developed afterwards In Bangladesh, the situation is different;
natural gas supply is declining, and LPG can serve as  substitute for natural
gas in new residential areas and for CNG in transportation The market for LPG is
already created, the main issue seems to be the pricing of LPG At present, the
price of LPG is much higher than that of the pipelined gas, and may not be
affordable for average households in Bangladesh While Bangladesh rural
households spend - % of their monthly income on traditional solid biomass, LPG
at the market price would be 25%  survey identified the key challenges with LPG
in Bangladesh Gas cylinder is not available on regular basis, and there is
transportation problem for gas cylinders from dealers to the households, often
they need to purchase it far from the household Also, the price of LPG is not
stable Renewables According to the 7th FYP, there is already some significant
success in the area of solar energy that has delivered 150MW equivalent of power
primarily through  highly successful Solar Home System (SHS) programme Some
million SHS units have been delivered While the delivered cost of electricity is
high (about BDT76/kWh,  USD095/kWh assuming 1USD=80BDT), they provide basic
lighting and other services in areas where the grid is unlikely to reach for
long time Rooftop solar PV systems are also being introduced in the country with
the current installed capacity estimated at 32 MW There is also 180 MW of wind
potential that has been identified through  USAID project Mini-grids and grid-
connected MW-scale solar PV plants are also being explored Large scale PV is
being planned with the first 100 MW plant It has been argued that lack of space
is  hindrance for PV development However, this argument is more anecdotic and
based on local conditions The Bangladeshi Government had previously planned to
generate 800MW of power through renewable energy by FY2017 with  target of 10%
of the total electricity to be met from 36 of 244 renewable resources by FY2020
However, this now appears to be overly challenging and delays are expected Wind
energy is  possibility, but due to low and very fluctuating wind conditions,
only  low utilisation rate of wind turbines can be expected This may make wind
expensive However, the technological development of wind turbines is now towards
low wind turbines which can be suitable for Bangladesh Waste to Energy could be
developed, but need to be adapted to local waste quality Biogas is potentially
large source of energy, but is presently hold back of the small size of farms
Nuclear There is currently no nuclear power in Bangladesh However, an agreement
with Rosatom was signed in February 2011 for two 1200 MWe-class reactors to be
built at Rooppur for the Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission Rooppur is close to
HVDC link with India and on the route of  planned 600 kV HVDC link running up
the western side of the country Table : Planned nuclear power reactors Type
Capacity Construction start Commercial operation Rooppur  AES-2006/-523 ,200 MWe
Aug 2017 2024 Rooppur  AES-2006/-523 ,200 MWe 2018 2025 Source: BPDB; PSMP2016
Hydropower Currently, Bangladesh has  hydropower plant of 230MW at Kaptai
(Chittagong), while further hydropower development has been planned and the
first unit of  Pumped Storage Power Plant (100 MW) is expected to be
commissioned by Bangladesh also has  strong interest to import hydropower from
neighbouring countries, as well as to invest in hydro projects abroad For
example, Bangladesh and Nepal have signed an agreement to build two
hydroelectric plants (,110MW Sunkoshi II and 536MW Sunkoshi III) capable of
generating over ,600 megawatts of electricity in Nepal  Budgetary impacts and
subsidies – the age of cheap energy is over The reliance on liquid fuel based
power plants and the growing share of fuel oil in power generation have
progressively increased the average supply cost of power and have strained power
sector finances The average bulk supply cost of power surged from BDT 65/kWh in
FY2010 to BDT 10/kWh in FY2015, which equates to  staggering 26% increase per
year The BERC responded by increasing bulk average tariff at  regular interval
Even so, the average bulk supply tariff of electricity is less than the average
cost of production The resulting financial losses have created pressure on the
national budget 37 of 244 Figure 20: Unit Cost of Electricity Generation (BDT
per KWh) Diesel Furnace Oil 95 CCGT on LNG Imported Coal  Imported Power
Domestic Gas 57 Source: Bangladesh 7th Five Year Plan, 2015 BPDB has received
budgetary support from Government due to loss between bulk supply cost and bulk
supply tariff, see Figure The electricity budgetary support increased from BDT
10 billion in FY2010 to BDT 60 billion in FY2012 The budgetary support stayed
around BDT 60 billion in the last few years thanks to the relatively low
international fuel oil prices Figure 21: Electricity Budgetary Support 70
60     50 40 30 20 10  FY2010 FY2011 FY2012 FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 Source:
Bangladesh 7th Five Year Plan, 2015 Until more recently, the gas prices have
been very low in Bangladesh The adjustments by BERC in 2016 and 2017 have
increased the end user prices, although they (except for CNG) are still below
the economic cost of gas 38 of 244 Figure 22: End User Price Comparison
(USD/mmBtu) LPG Retail Price LNG (long‐term contract)* LNG (spot)*  Gas ‐ Power
Gas ‐ Fertiliser  Gas ‐ Industry  Gas ‐ Captive Power  Gas ‐ Domestic (metered)
Gas ‐ Commercial  Gas ‐ CNG *LNG price (excl taxes) @ $60/bbl oil; LNG DES +
USD3/mmBtu regas and & tariff Source: BERC 2017, PSMP2016, Ramboll If economical
gas price is considered, the cost of electricity per kWh would be even higher
Even without accounting for the economic price of gas, total energy subsidies
amounted to BDT 204 billion in FY13, which is almost % of GDP, close to the
average of the GCC countries Figure 23: Gas subsidies as % of GDP GCC countries
Source: IEA This subsidy excludes capital investments financed entirely from the
national budget which amounted to BDT 100 billion in FY13 The total gap in
energy sector finances was therefore BDT 304 billion (USD 8bn) which is about %
of GDP Furthermore, in view of uncertainties of international oil/LNG prices,
and increasing shortage in domestic gas supply, the total energy subsidy
requirement may become too large and pose serious fiscal challenges to the
Bangladeshi Government In addition, research shows that much of the energy
subsidies benefit households that are not poor 39 of 244  Energy plans and
policies In recognition of the energy challenges faced by the country, the
Bangladeshi Government set out  National Energy Policy (NEP) in revision was
issued in 2008 adding  particular focus on renewable energy Currently, there are
no further updates on the NEP However, in committing to the Paris Agreement,
Bangladesh submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) in
September 2015, outlining its mitigation contributions for climate change It is
also recognised in the 7th Five Year Plan that specific gas sector policies are
required These issues are discussed in the texts below Energy Sector Policy Key
objectives of the NEP (2008): To provide energy for sustainable economic growth
so that the economic development  activities of different sectors are not
constrained due to the shortage of energy To meet the energy needs of different
zones of the country and socio-economic groups  To ensure optimum development
of all the indigenous energy sources  To ensure sustainable operation of the
energy utilities  To ensure rational use of total energy sources  To ensure
environmentally sound sustainable energy development programmes causing 
minimum damage to environment To encourage public and private sector
participation in the development and  management of the energy sector Gas
Sector Policy There is currently no clearly defined gas sector policy in
Bangladesh; however, it is recognised in the 7th Five Year Plan that specific
policies need to be developed for the following: () Gas Allocation Policy Since
Bangladesh will be facing extraordinary challenge for gas supply in near future,
it is critical for Bangladesh to establish clear gas allocation policy to best
utilise the limited domestic reserve Even after domestic reserve is depleted, an
expensive LNG cannot be used as freely as domestic gas was in the past
Therefore, regardless of domestic or import, policy on gas allocation is
required “Gas Allocation Policy” may not need to direct cross-sector allocation;
rather it should direct allocation for more energy efficient users within one
sector For example, within the power sector, higher energy-efficient combined
cycle power plant should enjoy higher priority of gas supply over efficiency-
deteriorated aged gas power plants, because lower efficiency means more gas
consumption to produce one unit of electricity In addition, as part of Gas
Allocation Policy, policy on how to disseminate gas prepaid meter and LPG should
also be defined Some of the current natural gas demand should be curbed by 40 of
244 prepaid meter, and be replaced with LPG  policy should define replacement of
existing pipelined gas by LPG followed by price adjustment Furthermore, in order
to promote the use of LPG, the price policy needs to be adjusted to minimise the
difference between LPG and pipelined gas tariffs Currently, LPG users are facing
more than  times higher tariff (at per calorific value) than that of pipelined
domestic gas, where one kg cylinder costs at 1200BDT In addition to LPG, biogas
can also be considered as the alternative of pipeline natural gas Similar to the
LPG utilisation policy, biogas utilisation policy may also define how primary
energy, namely pipeline gas, LPG and biogas can be best mixed (ii) Indigenous
Gas Exploration & LNG Import Policy Bangladesh still has untapped gas resources
The cost of exploration and development of untapped resource is likely to be
lower than the cost of LNG import Therefore, Bangladesh will need to focus on
investment for exploration and development Subsequently, LNG import should be
considered to ensure smooth supply of natural gas Two LNG FSRU terminals
(Excelerate and Summit) are scheduled to be constructed and in operation by
mid-2018 and end 2018, with  nameplate capacity of 500MMCFD for each terminal
Furthermore, in order to implement exploration and development of undiscovered
resources, external resources may be required The untapped resource is likely to
lie in coastal/transitional areas, hill tract areas or in the offshore areas
where seismic survey and drilling is difficult Especially, deep offshore oil and
gas exploration requires high technology and huge capital To address such
technical and financial issues, Joint Venture or “Strategic Partnership” between
BAPEX and foreign companies may be sought or Production Sharing Agreement with
IOCs who are experienced in such areas can be signed After delineation of
maritime boundaries with Myanmar and India,  new opportunity has opened up for
offshore exploration Therefore, both onshore and offshore oil and gas options
could be pursued Power Sector Policy The Bangladesh Power Division has  vision
and mission statement for the universal access to quality electricity in  cost-
effective and affordable manner, and ensuring reliable electricity for all by
2021 through integrated development of power generation, transmission and
distribution system In order to seek  practical and short-term solution toward
this vision, Power Division enacted “Power and Energy Fast Supply Enhancement
(Special Provision) Act 2010” is to expedite the introduction of highly
expensive quick rental power plants Meanwhile, PSMP2016 projects Bangladesh to
rapidly develop its grid power and start reducing low efficient/high cost
captive power from around 41 of 244 Renewable Energy Policy In response to the
revision of the National Energy Policy (NEP) 2005, the Renewable Energy Policy
was prepared in It defines the renewable energy targets; by 2015 Bangladesh will
introduce renewable energy % of all generation, and by 2020, 10% In December
2012, the Sustainable Renewable Energy Development Authority (SREDA) Act was
approved by the Parliament and SREDA was established The purpose of this
authority is to ensure the energy security, by promoting renewable energy and
energy efficiency and conservation In 2013, the Bangladeshi Government announced
“500MW Solar Program” to accelerate the renewable/PV solution Deployment As
discussed in the earlier section, the total installed capacity of SHS is
projected to be 220MW by There are also  small number of biogas-based power
generations and  wind power plant in Bangladesh, adding another 20MW capacity
The total renewable capacity by 2017 is therefore only 240MW, less than the
800MW target set by the Government Energy Efficiency and Conservation Policy In
the 7th Five Year Plan, energy efficiency and conservation is recognised as an
urgent policy priority The policy effort involves substitution of low thermal
efficient gas-fired power plants with more energy efficient plants; incentives
for adoption of improved fuel use efficiency and energy conservation technology
in industry; and conserving gas consumption by households through proper
metering and pricing based on volume of gas consumed rather than  monthly flat
rate per stove The potential for conserving gas through these steps is enormous
and the value of gas saved much exceeds the financial cost of implementing these
policies Pricing Policy In NEP 2005, it points out that “all forms of non-
renewable energy are to be priced at their economic cost of supply” The
Consultants understand that such policy has yet to be fully implemented due to
practical challenges; however, such pricing policy demonstrates that the
Bangladeshi Government recognises the need for further price adjustments, and
there have been significant increases in end user prices in 2016 and Further
discussions on this topic can be found in the Legal and Regulatory chapter of
this GSMP report Paris Agreement Bangladesh is  highly climate vulnerable
country and has already been affected by the impacts of climate change For
example, extreme temperatures, erratic rainfall, floods, drought, tropical
cyclones, rising sea levels, tidal surges, salinity intrusion and ocean
acidification are causing serious negative impacts on the lives and livelihoods
of millions of people in Bangladesh Moreover, the impacts of climate change are
gradually offsetting the remarkable socio-economic development which Bangladesh
has gained over the past 30 years, which is also likely to jeopardise the
country’ future economic growth However, at the same time, Bangladesh is also
working to achieve lower carbon as well as more resilient development 42 of 244
In its commitments to the Paris Agreement, Bangladesh submitted its Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) in September 2015, and it consists of
the following mitigation contributions:  An unconditional contribution to
reduce GHG emissions by % from Business as Usual (BAU) levels by 2030 in the
power, transport and industry sectors, based on existing resources 
conditional 15% reduction in GHG emissions from BAU levels by 2030 in the power,
transport, and industry sectors, subject to appropriate international support in
the form of finance, investment, technology development and transfer, and
capacity building   number of further mitigation actions in other sectors which
Bangladesh intends to achieve subject to the provision of additional
international resources Bangladesh already has  number of activities and targets
that are driving action to reduce GHG emissions and help the country to meet its
unconditional contribution, including:   target to reduce energy intensity (per
GDP) by 20% by 2030 compared to 2013 levels (EE& Master Plan)  An Energy
Management Programme, including establishment of Energy Management Systems and
energy audits for industry by accredited energy auditors  An Energy Efficiency
labelling programme to promote sales of high efficiency products in the market
Energy Efficiency measures for buildings, such as heat insulation and cooling
measures, and  revised code on energy efficiency of new buildings The Solar
Homes Programme, providing off-grid electricity access to rural areas The
country has set aggressive target to scale up the potentials of Solar Irrigation
 Pumps, Solar mini and nano grids to address the energy access issue of off-
grid population Improving kiln efficiency in the brick making industry,
composting of organic waste and  waste biomass-based thermal energy generation
 Construction of Combined Cycle Power Plant (CCPP) by the Government of
Bangladesh and utilities companies Bangladesh will also need to implement
additional mitigation actions in order to meet the conditional contribution
Examples of these are set out in the table below: Sector Description Objectives
by 2030 100% of new coal based power  Power Ensure all new coal generation 
plants use super-critical uses super-critical technology technology Increased
penetration of wind  400 MW of wind generating  power capacity Implement grid-
connected solar  1000 MW of utility-scale solar  plant to diversify the
existing power plant electricity generation mix 43 of 244 10% energy consumption
 Industry Carry out energy audits to  reduction in the industry sector
incentivise the uptake of energy (energy-related) compared to the business as
efficiency and conservation usual measures in the main industrial sectors based
on the Bangladesh Energy Efficiency and Conservation Master Plan 70% market
share of improved  Households Put in place policy mechanisms to  biomass
cookstoves, reaching 20 incentivise the uptake of million households in 2030
improved (more efficient) gas 40% market share of improved  cookstoves gas
cookstoves Support the replacement of  10% market switch from  biomass with
LPG for cooking biomass to LPG for cooking purposes compared to the business as
Promoting policies to induce  usual greater level of energy efficiency and
conservation in the household sector based on the Bangladesh Energy Efficiency
and Conservation Masterplan 25% reduction of overall energy  Commercial Promote
policies to induce greater  consumption of the commercial buildings level of
energy efficiency and sector compared to the business conservation in the
commercial as usual sector based on the Bangladesh Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Master plan Incentivise rainwater harvesting  in commercial
buildings as  form of water and energy conservation 70% of landfill gas captured
and  Waste Promote landfill gas capture and  used for electricity generation
power generation  Conclusions on the energy sector review The above findings
illustrate the shortage of energy in Bangladesh with regard to absolute quantity
as well as the range of options Indigenously produced natural gas has played
key role in the nation’ energy supply; however, as Bangladesh’ economy continues
to grow, indigenous gas production alone is unlikely to meet the nation’ demand
for energy The shortage of energy supply in Bangladesh has arguably affected the
nation’ economic development, and  growing demand-supply gap in the future is in
all likelihood to cut back Bangladesh’ economic growth further As the current
indigenous gas production starts to peak, LNG seems to be the only option in the
short term to improve the energy shortage situation in Bangladesh The
introduction to LNG will expose Bangladesh to the risks of fluctuating energy
and commodity prices with possibly heavier budgetary burdens 44 of 244 There is
path out of this -  window of opportunity also realised by the Government of
Bangladesh which has embarked on  journey to reform its gas and power sector
First of all, by launching the Power Sector Master Plan in 2016 followed by the
completion of this update of the Gas Sector Master Plan in 2017, the ground has
been laid for  more coordinated and structured approach for the future Secondly,
the timing for addressing gas pricing and subsidies might be right With
relatively low international energy prices, there is  window of opportunity for
Bangladesh to initiate  coordinated phase out of subsidies in both the power and
gas sector The key to the future energy requirement of Bangladesh lies in both
the economic development of the country and the government’ energy policies
Scenarios Setting As  country in the early take-off stage of its economic
development, Bangladesh faces large uncertainties in its long-term GDP growth At
the same time, the country needs to move away from the over reliance on
indigenous gas supply in order to overcome the growing energy shortage
Therefore, the Bangladeshi policymakers need to have various options in
designing the country’ energy sector policies, as well as enough flexibility to
fine-tune and revise these policies when necessary The Consultants have
developed three scenarios to capture  confined range of these uncertainties
mentioned above, and our gas demand forecasts are then derived based on these
assumptions Each of the three scenarios is as described below: Scenario
Scenario  Scenario  Modified PSMP2016 High Growth Climate Change  Scenario  -
Modified PSMP2016 In order to provide some consistency across the energy sector,
we have made Scenario  to reflect some key assumptions in the Base Scenario of
Power Sector Master Plan In particular, Scenario  assume the same GDP growth
projections as that in PSMP2016 Base Scenario, where the 7th FYP targets are to
be achieved and the GDP growth rates then decline gradually from % in 2020 to %
by This makes the GDP in 2041 four times as large as current level (2016)
Scenario  also assumes the same demand forecast for overall power generation as
that in PSMP2016 In the meantime, comparing to the original power development
schedule in the PSMP2016, there have been delays in the commissioning of some
coal-fired power plants in Bangladesh Consequently, some inefficient gas-fired
power plants are expected to be kept for 45 of 244 the next few years and
decommissioned only then Therefore, Scenario  assumes that, in the short-term,
gas demand from the power sector will increase modestly – rather than drop
sharply as assumed in PSMP2016 Nevertheless, the gas penetration in the power
generation is assumed in Scenario  to decline gradually yet significantly over
the forecast period This is to reflect  policy where coal is seen as  more
secure and favourable option to future gas import,  policy similar to the recent
development in India for example Except for the power sector, the gas demand for
all other sectors in Scenario  is forecasted independently to that in PSMP2016,
reflecting the Consultants’ own views of the gas sector development in
Bangladesh  Scenario  – High Growth This scenario assumes that Bangladesh will
be successful in pursuing an export-led economic growth model as indicated in
the 7th five-year plan In such case, Bangladesh will be able to continually
increase its export and shift its growth driver from currently  high reliance on
textile to  more diverse mix of manufacturing goods in the future Currently,
there are already  good number of foreign companies (particularly Chinese,
Japanese, and Korean) investing in Bangladesh, while the Bangladeshi Government
has the policy to develop around 100 special economic zones and attract further
foreign direct investments As such, this scenario assumes that the 7th five-year
plan’ short-term growth targets will be achieved and that the GDP growth rates
then maintain at % from 2021 to This makes the GDP in 2041 five times as large
as current level (2016) In the 7th five-year plan of Bangladesh, China is used
as  reference for the export-led economic growth model Until recent slowdown,
the Chinese economy had often been growing at around 10% per annum for  long
time although not without environmental and social costs Therefore, albeit
challenging,  % long-term GDP growth rate seems to be  reasonable assumption for
the High Growth Scenario if the Bangladeshi Government’ economic development
plans can be delivered Scenario  also implies  strong international environment
for trade, suggesting that Bangladesh is able to secure enough gas import
through pipeline connections from Asian countries as well as LNG from even wider
global sources This scenario will therefore be tilted towards use of gas,
similar to the recent development in the USA for example  Scenario  – Climate
Change The Climate Change Scenario can develop if rapid change in climate, or
understanding of the climatic development, takes place As Bangladesh is one of
the countries which are most exposed to rising sea level, increased
precipitation and more severe storms, there will be  strong focus 46 of 244 on
the issue inside the country and understanding in the population that there is
need to act on climate globally as well as in Bangladesh Bangladesh therefore
decides to become frontrunner on cleaner energy and energy savings In this
scenario, only  few coal fired power plants will be developed, while there will
be strong developments in renewables, natural gas, nuclear, and hydropower
imports For example, although there has so far been lack of support for large
solar power plants due to the high population density, this scenario assumes the
development of  clean energy policy where sufficient space will be made
available for solar power projects In the PSMP2016, it is found that the peak
load will change from evening as at present to mid- day over the coming years
With more solar energy, it is assumed that the midday peak demand to  large
degree will be supplied by solar energy, while the gas fired power plants will
cover the evening peaks It will hence still be necessary to develop further gas
network and gas power plants in Bangladesh to cover the peak demand too This
scenario also assumes that the cost of such  cleaner energy policy will have an
impact on Bangladesh’ economy, so that the GDP growth rates in the scenario
coincide with that in Scenario , making the GDP in 2041 four times as large as
current level (2016) The GDP growth rates for all three scenarios are as shown
as below: Figure 24: Bangladesh Real GDP Growth % 7th FYP Targets Historical
Growth Growth Forecast % % % % % % Scenario  % Scenar  & Scenario  % %   -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -     Source: World Bank, Bangladesh 7th FYP,
Ramboll  Gas demand forecast methodology  Demand vs Consumption To forecast the
gas demand in Bangladesh, it is important at first to look at the current gas
market status and make  distinction between demand and consumption of gas 47 of
244 Figure 25: Gas demand and supply 2016 ,736 mmcfd CNG, % Commercial, %
Domestic, 11% Industry, 15% Fertiliser, % ,754 mmcfd BAPEX, % SGFL, % BGFCL, 31%
Capative Power, 13% Grid Power, 48% IOCs, 59% Production Capacity Gas Demand
Source: Petrobangla According to Petrobangla estimate, the gas demand in
Bangladesh is ,736 MMCFD (36 tcf/) in 2016, made up by the following sectors:
grid power 48%, captive power 13%, fertiliser %, industry 15%, domestic 11%,
commercial %, and CNG % On the other hand, there is no imported gas and the
current production capacity from existing fields is only ,754 MMCFD (01 tcf/) of
which IOCs account for 59%, BGFCL 31%, SGFL % and BAPEX % As  result, the
consumption of gas in Bangladesh is currently capped by the indigenous
production; around ,000 MMCFD of demand for gas is not met The Consultants have
been advised by Petrobangla that the demand estimate is based on known
customers, while there are likely to be some hidden demand,  potential customers
who have not expressed their need for gas due to the shortage of supply It
should be noted that the actual gas production is on average below the
production capacity due to normal technical problems Therefore, the actual
demand-supply (demand-consumption) gap is even larger although the exact size
cannot be quantified In order to take  practical approach for our forecast, we
use the Petrobangla estimate of ,736 MMCFD as the current demand for gas in
Bangladesh  GSMP2006 Review The results and the approach for the 2006 master
plan have been evaluated to determine whether the approach is still fit for
purpose and complementary measures required in order to determine the demand for
gas in Bangladesh In GSMP2006,  detailed statistical regression analysis was
carried out to assess the historical () correlations between various gas demand
(by sectors and regions) and GDP in Bangladesh The result demonstrates strong
correlations between these variables in most case, hence the GDP elasticity
method was largely used to project future () gas demand under three GDP growth
scenarios: 48 of 244 Figure 26: GSMP2006 – GDP Growth Scenarios In Case , the
Bangladesh GDP was forecasted to grow on average around % per year between 2005
and 2015, which is close to the % actual annual growth during this period
Therefore, we choose Case  to assess how the GSMP2006 gas demand forecast has
performed against reality Figure 27: Bangladesh Gas Demand – Forecast vs
Consumption 2015 Demand      ,000 ,500 ,000 ,500 ,000 GSMP 2006 Demand Forecast
(% annual GDP growth ) 500 Consumption (% annual GDP growth )    -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -     Source: Woodmac
GSMP 2006, Ramboll Figure 27 above shows that the GSMP2006 has produced  demand
projection that is fairly close to the consumption of gas in Bangladesh over
10-year period It has an error margin of % in 2015, which reduces to less than %
if we eliminate the difference in the forecasted and actual GDP growth rates
However, the actual demand estimated by Petrobangla was ,200 MMCFD in 49 of 244
2015, over 20% higher than the GSMP2006 demand projection It is therefore in our
view important to modify the methodology in order to () recognise the
consumption-demand gap and improvements in energy efficiency, () recognise
sector structure changes, () consider impacts of power mix and overall energy
mix policy changes () Demand-Consumption Gap and Improvements in Energy
Efficiency As already discussed, indigenous production has been the only source
of gas supply in Bangladesh Despite the significant increases in output over the
past 20 years, the production level has not been able to catch up with the
country’ economic growth In other words, the consumption of gas in Bangladesh
has been held back by the shortage of supply, leaving  gap between demand and
consumption Turning this around, economic growth could have been higher if gas
demand was fully met This large demand-consumption gap (unmet demand) creates an
inaccurate illusion of the changes in demand, the correlations derived from GDP
growth and gas consumption growth therefore need to be modified for demand
projection For example, the elasticity of gas consumption to GDP for the
industry sector dropped from 58 between 1993 and 2003 to 68 between 2004 and
This was  decline largely due to the shortage of gas supply rather than slower
growth in demand Figure 28: Gas Demand Analysis – Industry Sector Gas Demand
Analysis ‐ Industry (1993‐2003) Gas Demand Analysis ‐ Industry (2004‐2014) =
4251x + 5026 R² = 9861 )               (   )               (   = 6696x + 614 R²
= 905        Ln(GDP @constant 2010 USD)   Ln(GDP @constant 2010 USD) Source:
Ramboll In addition, improvements in energy efficiency will reduce the energy
intensity for every unit of GDP, this in turn reduces the elasticity of gas
demand to GDP () Sector Structure Changes 50 of 244 As one sector undergoes
structure changes, the demand for energy is also likely to change It will
therefore be difficult to identify the relationship between GDP growth and
energy consumption Consider Bangladesh’ CNG sector for example: the sector
demand for gas increased 20 times from merely  MMCFD in 2003 to MMCFD in 2009,
reflecting the very early development stage of this sector However, the gas
consumption then only reached MMCFD in 2015, largely due to the shortage of gas
supply as well as the fact that the sector was now more stable As  result, the
correlation between CNG sector gas demand and GDP during this period was
relatively weak (with an -square of 74), and the corresponding elasticity of 02
is obviously not  good fit for future demand forecast Figure 29: Gas Demand
Analysis – CNG Sector  14 12 10 )               (      = 0233x ‐ 791 R² = 7355
Ln(GDP @2010 constant USD) Source: Ramboll () Power Mix & Overall Energy Mix In
GSMP2006, gas was forecasted to retain its overarching dominance in the
Bangladesh power mix, which would only start to give ground to coal from 2015,
but still account for around 90% of total power generation dispatch thereafter,
see Figure This assumption may no longer fit well with the Government’ policy
nor with the reality of future; therefore, different scenarios for power mix
need to be considered 51 of 244 Figure 30: GSMP2006 – National Power Generation
Dispatch Forecast – Case  Source Wood Mackenzie GSMP2006 In awake of shortage of
natural gas, the Bangladeshi Government has also started developing alternative
energy such as LPG  continued trend like this will gradually reduce the gas
penetration in the overall energy mix Consequently, the elasticity of gas demand
to GDP growth will be weakened over time Nevertheless, it needs to be recognised
that it is very challenging to quantify such effect and any projections are
subject to significant uncertainties  Approach to projecting demand For reasons
mentioned above, we will conduct our gas demand forecast based on the specific
characteristics of each sector, namely power, captive power, fertiliser,
industry, commercial, domestic, and CNG In the meantime, we use Petrobangla’
demand estimates as our base for Financial Year 2016/The power sector
projections in this study are derived from PSMP2016 In addition to the base case
scenario in PSMP2016, this study also considers different GDP growth rates as
well as gas shares of total power generation Modifications are also made on the
short-term outlook to reflect  more updated and realistic picture of the
development status power plants in Bangladesh We use GDP elasticity method for
industry and domestic sectors’ demand forecasts In the absence of relevant data,
we use the elasticity of gas consumption to GDP as  proxy for demand analysis
Meanwhile, we make modifications to these elasticities in recognition of the
historical consumption-demand gaps as well as higher gas prices and future
improvements in energy efficiencies Finally, we assume constant gas demand from
fertiliser and commercial sectors due to food security and government energy
policy respectively, and  constant rate of demand growth from 52 of 244 CNG
sector post In contrast, we assume the gas demand from the captive power sector
to gradually decline over time due to the development of grid power  Power
sector gas demand forecast  Historical trend of power consumption As shown in
Figure 31, the total power consumption of Bangladesh increased by  times from
11,409GWh in 2001 to 45,299GWh in The domestic (residential) sector is the
largest consumer and accounted for 51% of the total power consumption in 2016,
followed by industry sector consuming 34% of the total Figure 31: Bangladesh
historical electricity consumption 50,000 45,000 Other 40,000 Agriculture 35,000
Commercial    30,000 Industry Domestic 25,000 20,000 15,000 10,000 ,000 ‐
Source: BPDB  Power Plants According to PSMP2016, the total power generation
capacity in Bangladesh was 9GW in 2015 where gas-fired power plants accounted
for 62% The total installed capacity of gas-fired power has increased since
then, and lists of existing gas-fired power plants and planned new gas-fired
power plants are included in Appendix   Methodology In order to provide
reference to the Bangladeshi policy makers, this GSMP adopts the PSM2016
methodology in forecasting the power demand and subsequently the associated gas
demand in the power sector Additional scenarios with different GDP and gas share
of total power generation have also been included to reflect our views on future
possibilities – this in turn leads to different power and gas demand forecasts
53 of 244 However, some key assumptions in PSMP2016 are no longer up to date
Therefore, modifications are required to give more realistic projections For
example, PSMP2016 base case forecasts that the gas share of total power
generation declines rapidly from 69% in 2018 to 62% in 2019 and then to 36% in
2020 –  result of  number of new built coal-fired power plants However, the
Consultants understand that practical challenges and constraints have already
delayed some of the proposed new power plants in the original Power Development
Plan set out in PSMP2016 Meanwhile, the Bangladeshi Government is open to adjust
its power mix policy in response to recent significant changes in global energy
environment,  low international prices for oil and gas Hence, gas-fired power
plants will need to maintain  high share of power generation in the short-term
PSMP2016 base case forecast also assumes  number of old gas-fired power plants
to be retired over the next few years, while many new gas-fired power plants are
to be commissioned during the same period – thereby improving the average
operational efficiency of gas-fired power plants from around 25% in 2019 to
around 40% in This also seems to be unlikely due to practical challenges and
constraints It is our view that many old gas-fired power plants will continue to
operate for  longer period of time until new replacements are gradually in place
– hence only gradual improvements in the average operational plant efficiency
Peak demand projection PSMP2016 adopted the GDP elasticity method for peak
demand projection, we will therefore use the same approach in this study
Deciding the level at which the baseline is to be set is an important factor in
peak power demand forecasting Because of the particular situation in Bangladesh
whereby rolling blackouts have been used as  measure to circumvent power
shortages at the peak hours, the recorded maximum power consumption does not
include such potential power demand Therefore, an accurate forecast of the
maximum demand including the potential demand requires  theoretical estimation
of load curves from the daily operational data with particular attention on the
characteristics of the seasonal changes in the daily load curve and the
frequency and durations of rolling blackouts Because rolling blackouts have been
relatively rare on weekends and holidays in the winter (between November and
January),  daily load curve gives an actual peak load (at the hours of the peak
power consumption for lighting) that is quite accurate  daily load curve in the
summer gives estimates of the base and intermediate loads close to the recorded
values Therefore,  composite daily load curve representing the peak power demand
was created from the daily load curve in the summer with part of the peak hours
replaced by the same part of the daily load curve in the winter as shown in the
figure below The peak power demand in FY2014, which was used as the baseline for
the peak demand forecast, was set at ,039 MW by adding the base and intermediate
load in the summer (,487 MW and ,043 MW, respectively) and the peak load in the
winter (,811 MW) recorded in FY2015 The peak power demand in FY2015 was 54 of
244 estimated at ,921 MW in the same way and this value was used as the
reference value in the peak power demand forecast Figure 32: Peak power curves
Source: PSMP2016 Table  below shows the results of the maximum load analysis The
maximum load recorded in FY 2015 was ,500 MW, while  maximum load of
approximately ,921 MW was estimated from the estimated base load of ,170 MW, the
potential intermediate and peak-hour loads and the actual net/gross ratio
Therefore, the ,291 MW obtained in this analysis is used as the reference value
in the long-term demand forecast up to Table : Peak load estimation  Source:
PSMP2016 Table  below shows the historical trend for GDP elasticity of power
demand in Bangladesh for the last 10 years, and the average was Considering that
the elasticity in some other ASEAN countries (Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia)
also fell in the range between  and , see Table , this study assumes that this
27 will continue in the BAU (business-as-usual) case 55 of 244 Table :
Historical Trend of GDP Elasticity of Power Demand in Bangladesh Source:
PSMP2016 Table : Actual Energy-GDP Elasticity in ASEAN Countries Source:
PSMP2016 Based on the GDP elasticity method, the Bangladesh peak power demand is
projected to grow to 51GW by 2041 in Scenario  and Scenario , and 69GW in
Scenario , as illustrated in figure below 56 of 244 Figure 33: Bangladesh Peak
Power Demand Forecast 80,000   68,660 70,000 Scenario  60,000 Scenario  &
Scenario  50,000 50,979 40,000 30,000 20,000 10,000    -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-     Source: Ramboll  Power demand and gas share of total power generation
projection According to PSMP2016, the plant factor remains stable in between %
between 2017 and 2030, then gradually declines to 63% by We have therefore used
this set of plant factors for power demand (GWh) forecast In the  scenarios of
PSMP2016, for each year from 2017 to 2041, power generation requirement forecast
is the same but fuel mix generation is not equal In Scenario , we assume that
Bangladesh significantly changes its power sector mix by aggressively pursuing
alternative energy sources, especially coal The gas share of total power
generation requirement in this scenario stays at 70% of total between 2017 and
2020, then decreases significantly to merely 20% by In Scenario , we assume gas
to have  greater share in power mix, and the gas share of total power generation
requirement stays at 70% of total between 2017 and 2020, then gradually
decreases to 40% by In Scenario , the total power generation is the same as that
in Scenario ; however, the gas penetration is different The Consultants have
incorporated the latest power sector gas demand forecast agreed between
Petrobangla and BPDP The resultant power demand and generation requirement
forecasts are as shown below in Figure 34 and Figure 57 of 244 Figure 34: Power
demand/generation requirement forecast – Scenario     80% 400,000 Power Demand -
Total () 70% 350,000 Power Gen Requirement - Gas () 60% 300,000 Gas Share of
Total Power Gen () 50% 250,000 40% 200,000 30% 150,000 20% 100,000 10% 50,000 %
-   -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -     Source: PSMP2016, Ramboll Figure 35: Power
demand/generation forecast – Scenario     80% 400,000 70% 350,000 60% 300,000
50% 250,000 Power Demand - Total () Power Gen Requirement - Gas () 40% 200,000
Gas Share of Total Power Gen () 30% 150,000 20% 100,000 10% 50,000 % -   -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -     Source: PSMP2016, Ramboll 58 of 244  Gas demand
forecast The gas demand forecasts in this study are derived from the PSMP2016
base case forecast The difference between Scenario  and PSMP base case is the
result of modified timing for various power plants, as discussed in the
methodology section above While the difference between Scenario  and Scenario
is due to different GDP growth assumptions and policies for gas concentration in
power mix In Scenario , the demand for gas from the power sector increases from
,792MMCFD in 2016 to just below ,000MMCFD in 2019, reflecting  modest number of
new gas-fired power plants to become operational during this period However, the
gas demand then gradually drops to around ,358MMCFD by 2041, reflecting
scenario where existing gas-fired power plants to be replaced by new and more
efficient gas-fired power plants and even more so by new coal-fired power plants
The demand forecast of ,358MMCFD in 2041 is similar to the base case scenario
presented in PSMP2016 In Scenario , the gas demand increases to just below
,000MMCFD in 2019, then stays at this level until Such stabilised demand level
between Year 2020 and Year 2030 is to reflect  situation where new and more
efficient gas-fired power plants replace those existing inefficient plants,
hence more total gas-fired power generation from the same amount of gas inputs
The gas demand then increases rigorously before reaching ,690MMCFD by 2041,
reflecting additions of further gas-fired power plants while there are no
further decommissioning of existing plants during this period In Scenario , the
gas demand increases rapidly by  quarter from 1796MMCFD in 2016 to below
,266MMCFD in 2019, then steadily reaches almost ,000MMCFD by The significant gas
demand in this scenario reflects  situation where gas is continually to be seen
as  predominant source of power generation over the next 15 years or so,
contributing to  clean energy policy before large quantity of renewable energy
to be established in Bangladesh 59 of 244 Figure 36: Gas demand forecast – power
sector Gas Demand Forecast ‐ Power ,000  /     Secnario  ,500 Scenario  ,000
Scenario  PSMP2016 ,500 ,000 ,500 ,000 500    -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
Source: PSMP2016, Ramboll adjustments according to Petrobangla’ updated
information  Captive power sector gas demand forecast  Status of captive power
demand for each industrial subsector There is  lack of statistical data on
captive power demand from each relevant industrial subsector; however, below are
insightful findings from PSMP2016 Textile and Garment In the textile and garment
industry, both electricity and thermal energy are used in the process of
manufacturing Almost every factory is connected to the grid of distribution
companies However, it is generally observed that electricity generation from on-
site generators is utilised for sustaining factory production According to
existing literature, 80% of factories have their own captive power plant The
textile sector alone has  captive generation capacity of ,100 MW, while the
country as  whole has  total generation capacity of about ,525 MW as of December
There is  commonly observed practice in many factories that the electricity
demand mainly relies on captive generation from natural gas whereas the power
supply from grid is used as back-up This is due to the fact that the tariff of
gas supply for captive power is set lower than electricity tariff,  electricity
supplied by distribution companies to factories is at the rate of 95 BDT/kWh
while the cost of electricity generation from captive power is about  BDT/kWh,
60 of 244 even without utilising waste heat recovery This is why most industrial
facilities prefer using captive power generation Steel-making and Re-rolling
Most of the iron and steel factories are connected to the grid; however, many of
them also generate electricity through gas-fired captive power generation for
sustaining factory production The captive generation is said to be cheaper than
electricity supply from distribution companies by up to 30% Cement Cement
factories usually have grid connections Though many factories prefer to have
their own gas connection and generate electricity from natural gas, only 20% of
the units have their own captive power plant Glass, Sanitary and Tiles Almost
every factory has  connection to the grid However, electricity supply mainly
relies on captive power generation, and grid connection is used mainly as backup
power when gas supply is interrupted or is of low pressure New gas connections
have been suspended since March 2009, causing the stagnation of establishing new
factories Because of the restrictions in new connections of gas supply, some new
companies use CNG or HSD (High Speed Diesel) as substitute HSD is also used as
the fuel for back-up power generation for lighting The ceramics industry is
characterised by the fact that its manufacturing process is vulnerable to low
voltage electricity and low gas pressure, and this is said to be the main reason
for the recent trend of lowered quality and the slump in export Ceramic
tableware processes require uninterrupted power and gas supply so that the 360°
temperature is maintained constantly for 24 hours, and drops in temperature need
to take at least 12 hours for recovery which causes  huge loss in production
Stable supply of electricity and gas is indispensable Chemical, Plastic & Paper
Many factories in chemical, plastics and pulp & paper industries rely on
electricity generation through captive power generators for sustaining factory
production About 55% of factories are said to have their own captive power plant
Factories that have both electricity and gas connections use grid electricity as
backup power when gas supply is interrupted or of low pressure Electricity
supply quality is poor and the factories frequently suffer five to six hours of
load shedding in summer in Dhaka area, where SMEs in the plastics sector are
located Productivity is badly affected by shortage or fluctuations in
electricity supply Firms that have gas connections for captive power generation
enjoy relatively better conditions of power supply, but after early 61 of 244
2009, when the government stopped new gas supply connections, firms have
experienced difficulties with their planned expansion projects Agro Processing
Agro processing plants usually use captive power generation as the energy source
for sustaining factory production 50% of the factories have their own captive
power plant, and use gas or diesel as fuel sources  Balance between grid power
and captive power (gas-fired) As seen in the previous section,  common issue in
the captive power generation in Bangladesh is that the price of natural gas for
captive power generation is set at  low level Thus, the cost of captive power
generation is less expensive than the cost of power purchase from the grid
According to the existing literature, there are many factories that use the
electricity from the grid not because it’ economically rational, but because the
gas suppliers reject new connection requests Currently, the grid power capacity
is insufficient to meet the power demand in Bangladesh Hence, it will take years
for the grid power supply to cover the total power demand including the part
that is currently fed by captive power At the same time, there are also many
manufacturers who require captive power generation to guarantee high quality
power supply for their production process, as the power supply from the grid is
not reliable enough Such situation will start to change when the grid power
becomes developed and secure enough  Gas demand forecast We expect captive power
generation to gradually decline after 2020s when the capacity and quality of
grid power supply becomes more strengthened Petrobangla estimates the gas demand
from the captive power sector to be 480MMCFD in 2016/We therefore forecast the
gas demand to stay at this level until 2020, which then declines 10% per year
before reaching 58MMCFD in 62 of 244 Figure 37: Gas demand forecast – captive
power sector 600  /     500 400 Scenarios , ,  300 200 100    -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -     Source: Ramboll  Fertiliser sector gas demand forecast There are
seven Ammonia-Urea Fertiliser plants in Bangladesh listed in Table Six of these
are BCIC enterprises and one, Karnaphuli (KAFCO), is  joint venture between BCIC
and private sector interests from Japan, Denmark and the Netherlands Table 10:
Bangladesh fertiliser plants Factory Capacity Gas Demand (KMT/year) (MMCFD)
Jamuna 561 45 Chittagong 561 52 Polash 95 14 Ashuganj 528 52 Ghorashal 470 45
Shahjalal 580 45 Total for BCIC Plants ,795 243 Karnaphuli Urea – 570 63 Amm –
150 Grand Total ,515 316 Source: TCIL Report 2015, Petrobangla Daily Gas &
Condensate Production and Distribution Report 63 of 244 However, over the past
several years, both the BCIC plants and KAFCO have suffered from reduced gas
supply even though the KAFCO plant has  contractual arrangement for guaranteed
gas supply with its gas distribution company The gas consumption from the
fertiliser sector has declined from its peak of 263 MMCFD in 2004 to only 144
MMCFD in 2015/This is largely due to the government’ policy in rationing the
country’ gas consumption due to supply shortages, especially during summer when
the country experiences peak demand in power As shown in Table 11, Bangladesh
has been importing more than half of its urea in recent years, while demands for
fertilisers have not been fully met Table 11: Demand, production, import &
consumption of Urea, TSP, DAP & MOP fertiliser in Bangladesh Source: Fertilizer
Association of Bangladesh 64 of 244 We expect the demand for fertilisers to be
largely dictated by the total plant capacity rather than GDP or population
growth in Bangladesh Without clear information on future plans on fertiliser
sector development, we assume that the total plant capacity remains the same
Hence, the demand for gas stays at current level of 316 MMCFD which echoes
Petrobangla’ own projection However, it needs to be pointed out that the 316
MMCFD demand forecast is also largely based on the need to protect Bangladesh’
fertiliser sector and consequently protect the food security for the nation The
actual supply and consumption of gas in the fertiliser sector can be varied
based on the availability of gas as well as the commerciality of indigenous
fertiliser production versus imports For example, the average efficiency of the
fertiliser plants in Bangladesh is low 44mcf is required to produce  ton of urea
which is significantly less efficient than the world standard of 25mcf/ton
Therefore, it may be more economic for Bangladesh to import fertilisers rather
than producing them domestically This also implies that fertiliser plants in
Bangladesh may not all need to be running at full capacity, and incremental
demands for fertiliser due to population growth in the future can be satisfied
either by utilising more indigenous capacity or by higher levels of imports
Industry sector gas demand forecast The gas consumption from industry sector was
just over 405 MMCFD in FY2014,  relatively small increase from 389 MMCFD in
FY2013 In the meantime, Petrobangla estimates  demand of 542 MMCFD in FY2016,
suggesting an unmet demand of over 100 MMCFD This explains why the gas
consumption from the industry sector has experienced rapidly slowdowns in its
growth As shown in Figure 38 below, the elasticity of industry consumption for
gas to GDP has dropped from 43 between 1993 and 2003 to 67 between 2004 and
Figure 38: Gas demand analysis - industry Gas Demand Analysis ‐ Industry
(1993‐2003) Gas Demand Analysis ‐ Industry (2004‐2014) = 4251x + 5026 R² = 9861
)               (   )               (   = 6696x + 614 R² = 905        Ln(GDP
@constant 2010 USD)   Ln(GDP @constant 2010 USD) Source: Ramboll 65 of 244 At
its take-off stage of economic development, Bangladesh has an underdeveloped
industry sector Nevertheless, the success in textile exports has been  key drive
for Bangladesh’ economic growth in the past decades; this has also increased the
industry sector’ share in GDP to 28% in It is in the government’ 7th FYP to
accelerate the development of the industry sector Figure 39: Bangladesh GDP by
sector 7th FYP Services 60% 50%    40%   Industry      30% 20% Agriculture 10% %
Source: World Bank, Bangladesh 7th FYP As  result of this pro-industry policy of
the Bangladeshi Government, we expect the gas demand from industry sector to
grow strongly Given the shortage of gas supply in recent years, the elasticity
of industry consumption for gas to GDP between 2004 and 2014 understates the
actual demand growth Therefore, we choose the average elasticity ( 05) of gas
consumption to GDP between 1994 and 2014 as  proxy for gas demand projection We
also assume that, as  result of higher gas prices, energy efficiency
improvements and availability of alternative fuels, this elasticity declines
gradually by 60% by It needs to be recognised that there are large uncertainties
in the assumptions mentioned above These uncertainties are inherently
unavoidable because () historical trend in Bangladesh will no longer be  good
indicator for the future, and () there are large uncertainties in the overall
energy sector both within Bangladesh and internationally Figure 40 shows the gas
demand forecast for the industry sector In Scenario , gas demand reaches just
over ,600MMCFD in 2041, while in Scenario , the figure rises to just under
,600MMCFD 66 of 244 Figure 40: Gas demand forecast – industry ,000  /
Scenario  ,500 ,000 Scenarios & ,500 ,000 ,500 ,000 ,500 ,000 500    -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -     Source: Ramboll  Domestic sector gas demand forecast The
historical gas consumption from domestic sector has been strongly correlated
with GDP growth, see Figure Figure 41: Gas demand analysis - domestic Gas Demand
Analysis ‐ Domestic (2004‐2014) Gas Demand Analysis ‐ Domestic (1993‐2003) =
2317x + 9562 R² = 9783 )               (   )               (   = 2457x + 3519 R²
= 9715    Ln(GDP @constant 2010 USD)       Ln(GDP @constant 2010 USD) Source:
Ramboll Currently, there are just under  million households connected to natural
gas, many of these domestic users are charged on fixed monthly fees for their
stoves,  same monthly bill regardless of the actual use of gas This has
supposedly resulted in significant losses due to 67 of 244 wasteful use of gas
Initiatives are being taken by the Bangladeshi Government and local distributors
to improve this wasteful use situation For example, TGTDCL has been implementing
the Installation of Pre-paid Gas Meter Project In response to the shortage of
natural gas, the Bangladeshi Government has  policy to cap the gas supply to
domestic users, and promote LPG as an alternative to satisfy the future growth
in this sector As  result of the Consultants’ site visits in Bangladesh and
interviews with some locals, we recognise that domestic users’ demand for LPG is
growing fast, although LPG is still seen to be an expensive source of energy for
many low and mid income families We also believe that it can be practically
difficult and economically inefficient to make new customer connections in the
suburb areas of Dhaka, as it is our view that many of these suburb areas will be
restructured and redeveloped in the foreseeable future as Bangladesh’ economy
continues to grow In consideration of the government policy and economic
development factors as mentioned above, we project that the gas demand from the
domestic sector will remain constant for the next five years,  until However,
the majority of the population in Bangladesh are still using biomass ( wood) for
their domestic fuel usage This is most likely an impractical option as the
population becomes wealthier and move into new built residential buildings The
Consultants are of the view that indigenous LPG production alone is unlikely to
be sufficient for the nation’ growing demand, while natural gas is still likely
to be required as an important supplement As such, we use the elasticity of gas
consumption to GDP between 2004 and 2014 as  proxy for gas demand projection
Meanwhile, we recognise the effect of LPG development, weakened gas demand
growth due to higher gas prices, as well as the expectation that the wasteful
use of gas in the domestic sector will improve over time Therefore, we project
that elasticity of gas demand to GDP gradually declines by around 50% over the
forecast period Figure 42 shows the gas demand forecast for the domestic sector
In Scenarios  and , gas demand reaches 994MMCFD in 2041, while in Scenario , the
figure rises to around ,196 MMCFD, both are significant increases from the
estimated current demand of 425MMCFD 68 of 244 Figure 42: Gas demand forecast –
domestic ,400  /     ,200 Scenario  ,000 Scenarios & 800 600 400 200    -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -     Source: Ramboll  Commercial sector gas demand
forecast The historical correlations between gas consumption from commercial
sector and GDP has been somewhat weak, as the regression results in Figure 43
show -squares of only 53 and 72 for the periods  and , respectively Therefore,
the GDP elasticity method will not be adequate for the future gas demand
forecast for the commercial sector Figure 43: Gas demand analysis - commercial
Gas Demand Analysis ‐ Commercial (1993‐2003) Gas Demand Analysis ‐ Commercial
(2004‐2014) )               (   )               (    = 0355x + 9944 R² = 5305
= 3815x + 2911 R² = 7194            Ln(GDP @constant 2010 USD)   Ln(GDP
@constant 2010 USD) Source: Ramboll 69 of 244 Currently, the Bangladeshi
Government has  policy to promote LPG to replace natural gas for additional
demand from the commercial sector Given the small quantity requirement, we
assume that LPG will be sufficient to satisfy all incremental demand from the
commercial sector, while the gas demand in the sector will remain at current
level,  38 MMCFD (incl  MMCFD from Tea) throughout the forecast period, as shown
in Figure This echoes with Petrobangla’ own projection Figure 44: Gas demand
forecast – commercial 40  /     35 30 25 Scenarios , ,  20 15 10     -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -     Source: Ramboll 10 CNG sector gas demand forecast Started
from 2002, the CNG sector in Bangladesh has yet to reach an
established/stabilised stage of its development Due to supply shortage, the CNG
price is being increased to discourage consumption, while the quantity of supply
has also more or less been capped For these reasons, there is no strong
correlation between historical CNG consumption for gas and GDP growth as seen in
Figure Therefore, GDP elasticity method will not be used for CNG demand forecast
70 of 244 Figure 45: Gas demand analysis - CNG 14 12 10 )               (      =
0233x ‐ 791 R² = 7355          Ln(GDP @2010 constant USD) Source: Ramboll As of
2017, there are 596 approved CNG refuelling stations for almost half million
running vehicles See table below for details: Table 12: Bangladesh CNG Sector
Overview Approved Approved CNG CNG Running Monitoring CNG FY CNG Converted
Vehicles (#) Activities (#) Refuelling Workshop (#) Vehicles (#) Stations (#)
Prior June 2015 590 180 220,920 259,050 60   - 32,289 34,542 100   - 10,916
204,158 86 Total 596 180 264,125 497,750 246 Source: RPGCL 2017 At the time of
writing, the Bangladeshi Government has  policy to encourage LPG to fill the
growth of automobiles because of the current shortages of natural gas However,
the Consultants are of the view that such policy can be revised as Bangladesh
starts importing gas and becoming less and less constrained by indigenous
production Furthermore, to support Bangladesh’ goals in its economic
development, large quantity of additional energy will be required Therefore, the
development of LPG alone may not be enough to satisfy the nation’ demand, while
the need for natural gas will continue to grow albeit at  slower pace ExxonMobil
projects the global demand for gas in transport sector to increase  folds
between 2014 and 2040, an equivalent of % average annual growth rate We assume
the CNG demand 71 of 244 of Bangladesh to hold at the current level up to 2020
and then grow at the rate as the global average -  rate lower than the nation’
GDP growth forecast Given that the CNG sector is already facing  high retail
price of USD/mcf as of 2017, the need for further price increases is limited
Consequently, very little impact of price on demand should be included for the
gas demand forecast for the CNG sector As shown in Figure 46, the gas demand
from CNG sector is projected to grow from 139MMCFD in 2016 to 335MMCFD by Figure
46: Gas demand forecast – CNG 400  /     350 Scenarios , ,  300 250 200 150 100
50    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -     Source: Ramboll 11 Total Gas Demand
Forecast Using Petrobangla’ estimation as our base year demand reference, we
have derived the total gas demand in Bangladesh to be ,740MMCFD (eqv 4tcf/year)
in Financial Year 2016/As shown in Figure 47, the total gas demand is projected
to reach ,713MMCFD (eqv 5tcf/year) by 2041 in Scenario , 10,208MMCFD (eqv
7tcf/year) in Scenario , and ,346MMCFD (eqv 0tcf/year) in Scenario  The
indigenous production is estimated to be ,750MMCFD in 2016, as much as ,000MMCFD
less than the estimated demand We consequently see  continuous increase in
consumption when new supply sources are made available 72 of 244 Figure 47: Gas
demand forecast – total 12,000      10,000 Scenario  Scenario  ,000 Scenario
,000 ,000 2016 Production ,000    -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -     Source:
Ramboll In Scenario , the gas demand from power sector is projected to fall if
the gas share in power generation is to be reduced from current level of around
70% to only 20% by 2041, which is less than IEA World Energy Outlook 2016 global
average of 23% The share of power in total gas demand drops from 48% in 2016 to
only 20% in 2041, while captive power to fade away during the same period In
contrast, the demand from both industry and domestic sectors is forecasted to
grow strongly, together accounting for 69% of total gas demand by In Scenario ,
the gas share in power generation is to be declining from current level of
around 70% to 40% by 2041, much less aggressively than that in Scenario  By
2041, the absolute gas demand from the power sector doubles from current level,
although the share of power in total gas demand drops from 48% in 2016 to 36% in
Similar to Scenario , captive power is projected to fade away whilst the demand
from both industry and domestic sectors are forecasted to grow strongly
throughout the period Scenario  projects the same gas demand as Scenario  in all
sectors except in Power, where the gas demand in this sector reaches around ,000
MMCFD in 2041, accounting for 36% of total gas demand of Bangladesh In all
scenarios, the gas demand from CNG sector is projected to grow after 2020 at %
Meanwhile, the demand from fertiliser and commercial sector is projected to stay
at  constant level 73 of 244 Figure 48: Gas demand by sector Scenarios , ,
Bangladesh Gas Demand Forecast by Sector ‐ Scenario  Bangladesh Gas Demand
Forecast by Sector ‐ Scenario  Bangladesh Gas Demand Forecast by Sector ‐
Scenario  14,000 14,000 14,000 CNG CNG CNG Commercial Commercial Commercial
Modified PSMP2016 Climate Change High Growth 12,000 12,000 12,000 Domestic
Domestic Domestic 10,000 10,000 10,000 Industry Industry Industry Fertiliser
Fertiliser Fertiliser ,000 ,000 ,000                Captive Power Captive Power
Captive Power ,000 ,000 ,000 Power Power Power ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ‐ ‐
‐   ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐       ‐
‐       ‐       ‐     Source: Ramboll Figure 49: Gas demand forecast by sector
share Gas Demand 2041 ‐ Scenario  Gas Demand 2041 ‐ Scenario  Gas Demand 2041 ‐
Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ 2016 % % % % % % % % Power 12% 11% 20% 12% Captive Power
15% % 36% 36% Fertiliser 48% 15% % Industry Domestic % Commercial 43% 45% 54%
CNG % 13% % % % Source: Ramboll 12 Regional Gas Demand Forecast There are six
companies covering the gas distribution in Bangladesh, namely TGTDCL, BGDCL,
JGTDSL, PGCL, KGDCL, and SGCL Brief overviews for each of these companies are
presented below 74 of 244 Figure 50: Bangladesh gas distribution by franchise
area Source: GTCL, Ramboll 75 of 244 Titas Gas Transmission and Distribution
Company Limited (TGTDCL) The discovery of  huge gas field on the bank of the
Titas River in Bhramanbaria in 1962 created  new horizon for the utilisation of
natural gas Titas Gas Transmission and Distribution Company Limited (TGTDCL) was
established on 20 November The company began its commercial operation with the
commissioning of gas supply to Siddhirganj Thermal Power Station on 28 April
1968 after construction of 14"  93 km Titas-Demra gas transmission pipeline by
the then East Pakistan Industrial Development Corporation In October 1968, the
first domestic natural gas connection was provided to the residence of renowned
litterateur Shawkat Osman In the beginning, 90% of its shares belonged to the
then Pakistan Government, and Pakistan Shell Oil Company owned the rest Under
the Nationalisation Order of 1972, all the Government- owned shares of the
company were invested in the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) In accordance with
an agreement signed between Shell Oil Company and GoB on  August 1975, the
ownership of the remaining 10% shares was transferred to the GoB through
Petrobangla After the independence of Bangladesh in 1971, the company started
its journey as  company of Petrobangla with an authorised and paid up capital of
BDT million At present, the authorised and the paid up capitals of the company
are BDT 20,and BDT ,million, respectively Presently, Petrobangla holds 75%
shares of this company while private shareholders hold 25% of shares The main
objective of the company is to supply natural gas to customers of different
categories under its franchise area and thereby reduce dependency on imported
liquid fuel Towards this end, the company has to construct, operate and maintain
pipelines, stations and associated facilities Currently, the company distributes
gas in the districts of Dhaka, Narayanganj, Narsingdi, Munshiganj, Manikganj,
Gazipur, Tangail, Mymensingh, Jamalpur, Sherpur, Netrokona and Kishoreganj
Presently, total length of pipeline owned by the company is 12,03 km including
53 km built during the FY 2014-The total number of customers of the company was
,897,316 as on 30 June 2015 which rose to ,996,801 in December Bulk customers of
the company include  fertiliser plants,  government and 28 private power
stations Bakhrabad Gas Distribution Company Limited (BGDCL) Bakhrabad Gas
Distribution Company Limited (BGDCL), previously named as Bakhrabad Gas Systems
Limited (BGSL), was established on  June 1980, initially with the three-fold
responsibilities of production, transmission and distribution Gas supply was
commenced on 20 May Subsequently, Bakhrabad Gas Field was handed over to BGFCL
putting an end to its production wing Further, the  main transmission pipe lines
of the company, 24"  110 km Bakhrabad-Chittagong and 20"  69 km Bakhrabad-Demra
gas transmission pipe lines were handed over to GTCL leaving only the
responsibility for marketing 76 of 244 gas in the Chittagong Division excluding
Brahmanbaria district and Kashba and Bancharampur Upazilas (outside its
franchise area) As per Government decision, the company has again been
reconstituted keeping greater Comilla and greater Noakhali Districts under its
franchise area and adding Brahmanbaria to its operational area The cumulative
gas pipeline of different categories constructed by the company up to 30 June
2015 is ,869 km During the FY ,  total of 81,103 domestic gas connections
(burner) were given The cumulative gas connection stood at 399,540 as on 30 June
2015 which includes 15 power,  fertiliser, 157 industrial, 74 captive power,
,140 commercial, 88 CNG and 397,067 domestic (Burner) connections In order to
enhance the gas supply to the greater Noakhali region,  project was undertaken
to supply gas to Maijdee Lateral Line from Begumganj Gas Field with  cost of BDT
million As per approval 10 bar "  378 km pipeline from Begumganj Gas Field to
Maijdee Lateral Line at Setubhanga Point and 30 bar "  207 metre pipeline in the
premises of Begumganj Gas Field were constructed One RMS of 20 MMSCFD capacity
was also installed in the Begumganj Gas Field Jalalabad Gas Transmission and
Distribution System Limited (JGTDSL) Jalalabad Gas Transmission and Distribution
System Limited (JGTDSL) was formed under the Companies Act on  December 1986
with an authorised capital of BDT ,500 million after infrastructural development
of gas transmission and distribution system under the management of Petrobangla
for supplying gas to different categories of customers in Sylhet Division During
the FY , the Company possessed  gas network comprising of 08 km transmission,
,29 km distribution, ,42 km feeder mains and service lines and 34 km other
(customer financing) pipelines During the year, the company provided 16,546 new
gas connections -  power station, 11 captive power,  industrial,  CNG, 115
commercial and 16,408 domestic connections - which was 55% higher than the
previous year Pashchimanchal Gas Company Limited (PGCL) This is the 4th gas
marketing company under Petrobangla set-up with the objective of distributing
gas in the north-west region of the country The Company commenced its business
on 23 April By the end of June 2015, the Company encompassed  network of ,21 km
pipeline At the end of FY , the company provided gas connection to ,19,483
customers Karnaphuli Gas Distribution Company Limited (KGDCL) Karnaphuli Gas
Distribution Company Limited (KGDCL) was formed on  February 2010, with greater
Chittagong and Chittagong Hill tracts area under erstwhile BGSL franchise,
pursuant to  government decision to rationalise and improve the services of the
companies under Petrobangla The commercial activities of the company commenced
on  July 77 of 244 At the end of the FY , KGDCL had  customer base of 533,273 of
which 60,671 (CNG , Industry , Captive Power  and Domestic 60,663) were new
customers During FY , 83 km distribution pipelines with diameters ranging from "
to " were constructed Following Steps have been taken to prevent misuse and to
ensure the accuracy of metering system: Tele-metering system has been introduced
initially in the RMS of  bulk industrial customers (KAFCO, Shikolbaha Power
Station, 210MW CTPS, KPM and CUFL) for monitoring the quantum of gas supplied to
them Meters with Electronic Volume Correctors (EVCs) are being installed in the
RMS of load intensive customers By now, meters with EVCs have been set up in the
premises of 164 customers including 62 CNG, 64 captive power and 38 industrial
customers, and they are billed on the basis of EVC data With the finance of
Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA),  project for installation of
60,000 pre-paid gas meters for the domestic users in the Chittagong city area is
in progress to prevent the misuse of gas Rest of the domestic customers will be
brought under this system in phases Development of customised software by IICT,
BUET to bring all the activities of KGDCL under ERP software is in progress
Installation of online gas bill system by IICT, BUET is in process to ensure
easy and fast bill payment by all categories of customer of KGDCL The company
has undertaken the work of mapping its network of gas pipelines and gas
installation through the Center for Environment and Geographic Information
Services (CEGIS) Sundarban Gas Company Limited (SGCL) The Sundarban Gas Company
Limited (SGCL) was formed on 23 November 2009 with the objective of supplying
natural gas to the south-western region of the country which includes Khulna
Division, Barisal Division and  districts of Dhaka division In the initial
stage, the Company has been implementing gas distribution network in  districts,
namely Kushtia, Jhenaidah, Jessore, Khulna and Bagerhat under “South West Region
Gas Distribution Network Project" since February The project is being
implemented through joint financing by the Government of Bangladesh and Asian
Development Bank (ADB) To implement the project, the necessary procurement of
pipeline materials and other items have been completed On the other hand, the
Rupsha river crossing work for laying 20" diameter line pipe through HDD is in
progress Land acquisition for company’ head office building in Khulna and
regional offices of other  districts have been completed  MOU has been signed
with House Building Research Institute as consultant for performing the work of
design, drawing, estimating and preparing tender document It is to be mentioned
here that “South-West Region Gas Distribution Network Project” was closed in
2016 - despite SGCL taking new projects for connecting gas to Power and
Industrial customers Presently, Sundarban Gas Company Limited is supplying gas
to the island district Bhola and Bheramara under kushtia district In Bhola one
MW rental power plant of venture Resources 78 of 244 Ltd, 225 MW power plant of
PDB and ,000 domestic customers and in Bheramara one 360 MW power plant are
connected with the gas distribution network of this company Extension of gas
distribution network in Bhola town and new network at Borhanuddin have already
been completed There have been  more MOU signed between SGCL and concerned
authority to supply gas to: - Khulna 225 MW power plant (required gas load 35
MMCFD) - Khulna 800 MW power plant (required gas load 125 MMCFD) - Bhola 225 MW
power plant (required gas load 23 MMCFD) The relevant implementation works are
in progress Gas Demand Forecast by Franchise Area Figure 51 below shows the gas
demand estimations for each franchise area in 2016/Titas franchise area has the
largest gas demand which accounts for almost half of the nation’ total,
Karnaphuli franchise area is the second largest with 14% of the total,
Bakharbad, Jalalabad and Sundarban franchise areas have similar level of gas
demand and each accounts for 10%-11% of the Bangladesh total, meanwhile
Pashchimanchal francise area has the least demand with % of the nation’ total
Figure 51: Gas Demand – Franchise Areas Share of Total Bangladesh Demand BGDCL,
11% JGTDSL 10% TGTDCL 49% KGDCL 14% PGCL, % SGCL, 11% Source: BGDCL, JGTDSL,
KGDCL, PGCL, SGCL, TGTDCL, Ramboll As Bangladesh is going through the take-off
stage of its economic development, there are large uncertainties in how each
sector and region in the country will develop economically, which in turn
creates large uncertainties in regional gas demand Therefore, for simplicity, we
assume each of the franchise area mentioned above will maintain its share of
total Bangladesh gas demand, and the demand forecasts are as shown in graphs
below: 79 of 244 Figure 52: Gas Demand Forecast by Franchise Areas Gas Demand
(mmcfd) ‐ Scenario  ,000 Gas Demand (mmcfd) ‐ Scenario  ,000 Gas Demand (mmcfd)
‐ Scenario  PGCL JGTDSL 254 316 10,000 387 ,000 702 ,000 873 ,067 ,000 BGDCL 755
939 ,148 197 544 ,000 ,000 236 651 ,000 SGCL 763 948 ,160 585 160 441 ,000 ,000
700 KGDCL ,000 957 228 629 ,190 141 391 420 ,455 592 171 473 508 514 474 708
,000 ,000 676 742 479 141 391 420 424 533 888 162 449 482 487 612 683 424 ,000
,000 601 141 391 420 424 533 857 533 ,000 644 TGTDCL ,282 ,000 ,081 ,991 ,000
,546 ,045 ,000 ,060 ,827 ,940 ,210 ,000 ,827 ,098 ,827 ‐ ‐ ‐ FY2016‐17 FY2020‐21
FY2030‐31 FY2040‐41 FY2016‐17 FY2020‐21 FY2030‐31 FY2040‐41 FY2016‐17 FY2020‐21
FY2030‐31 FY2040‐41 Source: Ramboll 80 of 244  GAS SUPPLY This chapter presents
the work carried out on the supply elements of the Updated Gas Sector Master
Plan and Strategy for Bangladesh The overall structure of the chapter is based
on the GSMP (2006); however, updated with relevant new topics The chapter is
structured into seven sections:  Review of the upstream supply sector  Gas
reserve position for Bangladesh  Country supply – production forecasts  Review
of GSMP 2006  Analysis of the exploration program by public sector  Analysis
of the exploration program by private sector  Key recommendations for gas
supply augmentation  Review of the upstream supply sector This review is based
on relevant annual reports provided by Petrobangla and its subsidiaries, as well
as other relevant documents provided by Petrobangla for this study  Industry
structure Upstream, midstream and downstream activities for Oil & Gas in
Bangladesh are carried out by both the public sector represented by Petrobangla
and by the private sector represented by the International Oil Companies (IOCs)
currently operating in the country The public participation in the oil and gas
industry in Bangladesh is organised into four distinct segments with individual
companies, which are subsidiaries of Petrobangla, responsible for exploration,
production, transmission and distribution of natural gas Following Bangladesh’
achievement of independence from Pakistan in 1971,  new State oil Company,
Bangladesh Oil and Gas Corporation (Petrobangla), was established in 1972 to
promote and regulate petroleum activities in Bangladesh either on its own or in
joint ventures with foreign parties In 1985, Petrobangla was re-organised and
formally renamed the Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Minerals Corporation (BOGMC) as
public sector holding corporation with eleven subsidiary companies BOGMC
coordinates, supervises and controls its subsidiaries in exploration, production
and distribution and are under the direct control of the Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources The organisational setup of BOGMC (Petrobangla) is illustrated
in the organisation chart, see Figure 81 of 244 Figure 53: Petrobangla
Organisational Structure Source: Petrobangla Annual Report 2016 82 of 244  State
Upstream Companies BAPEX BAPEX was formed in 1989, by abolishing the Exploration
Directorate of Petrobangla with purpose of accelerating the exploration of oil
and gas within the country and to undertake drilling operations In 2000, BAPEX
was turned into an exploration and production company and given permission to go
into production alongside with its exploration activities Against this backdrop
BAPEX was registered as an exploration and production company in BAPEX currently
employs around 720 (2016) but has in its organisation structure room for 1800
employees BAPEX owns three drilling rigs and two workover rigs and offers
geophysical, geological and laboratory services BAPEX produces nearly 130 MMCFD
from Shaldanadi, Shahbazpur, Fenchuganj, Semutang, Begumganj, Shahzadpur-
Sundulpur and Srikail gas Fields Since its start, BAPEX has successfully
completed work-over operations of 27 wells, drilling of  exploration wells and
21 development wells Out of the  exploration wells,  gas fields have been
discovered Under Bangladesh Offshore Bidding Round in 2012, two production
sharing contracts (PSCs) have been concluded with ONGC Videsh Ltd (OVL) and Oil
India Ltd (OIL) for shallow-sea blocks SS- and SS- (Figure 54), and one PSC with
Santos Sangu Field Ltd and KrisEnergy Bangladesh Ltd for shallow-sea block SS-
The Government of Bangladesh has nominated BAPEX as stakeholder carrying 10
percent interests for these blocks  joint operating agreement was signed with
Santos Sangu Field Ltd and KrisEnergy Bangladesh Ltd on 18 June Signing of
joint operating agreement with ONGC Videsh Ltd (OVL) and Oil India Ltd (OIL) is
in the offing Participating in an international open tender, BAPEX obtained
contract for drilling Bangora  and  development wells which fall under
KrisEnergy, the operator of PSC block  Bangladesh Gas Fields Company (BGFCL) The
Bangladesh Gas Fields Co Ltd (BGFCL) was registered in 1956 and was owned by
Shell until the mid-seventies, when Shell sold it to the Government of
Bangladesh BGFCL became  public limited company in The company owns six gas
fields - Titas, Habiganj, Bakhrabad, Narsingdi, Meghna and Kamta During , approx
300 bcf of gas and 180,000 barrels of condensate, extracted as by-product from
the gas, were produced by the Company, which amounts to around 35% of
Bangladesh’ total gas production As per latest report of Petrobangla, total
recoverable gas reserve of  fields under the company is about tcf, out of which
tcf or about 58 % was recovered till 30 June The Titas gas field represents 65%
of BGCFL’ total production and is the most important field in Bangladesh Gas is
produced from 26 wells and due to the requirement to meet the domestic gas
demand, the field is kept running flat out at almost full capacity This has led
to little reservoir data 83 of 244 being gathered over the field life of some 35
years Water production has risen in line with gas production Completed recent
projects include appraisal of gas fields with 3D seismic data The objective of
the project was to determine the gas reserve, delineate the overall geological
features as well as the structural extent of Titas, Bakhrabad, Sylhet,
Kailashtila and Rashidpur gas fields by conducting 3D seismic survey Under BGFCL
part of the project, 335 km2 field level 3D seismic survey over Titas structure
was completed Based on this, drilling of 11 new wells has been proposed at Titas
gas field in Among the proposed 11 wells, drilling of Titas 18, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27 has been completed 210 km2 field level - seismic surveys over Bakhrabad
structure were completed and upon completion of data processing and data
interpretation, final survey report was submitted on 18 March In the report,
drilling of  new wells at Bakhrabad gas field has been recommended Among these,
well (BKB#10) has been drilled Sylhet Gas Fields Limited Sylhet Gas Fields
Limited (SGFL),  company of Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Mineral Corporation
(PETROBANGLA) under the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources is the
pioneer in the discovery and production of natural gas and mineral oil in the
country Though this Company was incorporated on 8th May 1982 under companies Act
1913, its history of production and sale of natural gas dates back to 1960 under
the umbrella of its predecessor, erstwhile Pakistan Petroleum Limited (PPL)
which discovered gas at Sylhet Well No  at Haripur in Sylhet District in It was
the first hydrocarbon discovery in the Country At present, the Company has under
its umbrella  gas fields, namely Sylhet (Haripur), Kailashtilla, Rashidpur,
Beanibazar and Chhatak with 12 producing gas wells ( at Sylhet,  at
Kailashtilla,  at Rashidpur and  at Beanibazar) which produce an average of 140
mmsfd of gas SGFL shares about % of country’ total gas production In the FY ,
SGFL produced 54 bcf of gas and 225696 barrels of condensate and 173730 barrels
of NGL The company also produced 980130 barrels of finished petroleum products –
petrol, diesel and kerosene – by fractionating natural gas- condensate from its
own fields and Bibiyana Gas Field operated by Chevron Bangladesh The company has
been implementing various development projects with the objective of
diversifying its activities and enhancing gas production capacity The ongoing
projects are: () Installation of 4000 BPD capacity Condensate Fractionation
Plant at Rashidpur, (ii) Installation of 3000 BPD capacity Catalytic Reforming
Unit (CRU) at Rashidpur to convert Petrol into Octane, (iii) Drilling of well no
Kailashtilla- (Appraisal/ Development Well), (iv) Drilling of well no Sylhet -
(Appraisal/ Development Well), () Reviewing of 3D Seismic Survey data and
reports of Sylhet (Haripur), Kailashtila & Rashidpur Structures of SGFL & (vi)
Workover of  wells (KTL-, RP- & ) under SGFL 84 of 244  International Oil
Companies currently operating (IOC) Chevron Chevron has the capacity to supply
50% of the natural gas produced in Bangladesh Chevron merged with the American
company Unocal in 2005 and thus acquired its gas fields from Unocal All the
natural gas and condensate that Chevron produces in Bangladesh is sold to
Petrobangla, the national oil company Through Chevron subsidiaries, the company
operates three fields; Bibiyana, Jalalabad and Moulavi Bazar, under production-
sharing contracts signed with the Government of Bangladesh, represented by the
Ministry of Energy & Mineral Resources and Petrobangla In 2015, net daily
production averaged ,400 MMCFD of natural gas and ,000 barrels of condensate
produced with the natural gas Chevron operates the Bibiyana Field in Block 12
(Figure 54) In late 2014, the company announced the start of production at the
Bibiyana Expansion Project The project includes two gas processing trains,
additional development wells and an enhanced liquids recovery facility and has
capacity of 300 MMCFD of natural gas and ,000 barrels of condensate per day The
liquid recovery facility started up in the first quarter of Chevron operates the
Jalalabad gas field in Block 13 which is currently the third highest gas
producer in Bangladesh Discovered in 1989, it went into production in Chevron
produces natural gas from the Moulavi Bazar gas field in Block It was discovered
in 1999 and came on- line in In April 2012, Chevron launched the Muchai
compression project which supports additional production from the Bibiyana,
Jalalabad and Moulavi Bazar natural gas fields In 2017, it was announced that
Chevron intents to sell its interests to Himalaya Energy Himalaya Energy is
owned by  consortium comprising state-owned China ZhenHua Oil and the investment
firm CNIC Corp The deal is currently under the consideration of the Bangladeshi
Government and awaits its approval Santos Sangu Fields Limited In 2010,
Australia’ Santos acquired the interest of Carin and has the operatorship of the
offshore Sangu field wherefrom production since  October 2013 has been suspended
Santos has launched an exploration targeting the offshore Magnama structure
under  joint venture with BAPEX Magnama is situated close to Sangu in offshore
Block 16 (Figure 54) and may hold  tcf of gas in place  recent exploration well
on the structure reportedly was dry suggesting that no significant resource is
present in the structure The Consultants have not seen details on the assessment
nor the drill data Santos holds  51% operated interest at Sangu, with Bapex
owning the remaining 49% stake In March 2014, Santos was awarded  45% interest
and operatorship in Block SS-11 PSC (in joint operation with KrisEnergy [45%]
and BAPEX [10%]) The majority of the block lies in shallow 85 of 244 waters up
to 200 metres with the furthest southwest portion extending into water depths up
to  500 metres Block SS-11 is adjacent to the Bangladesh/Myanmar maritime
boundary and is north of the about  tcf Shwe large gas field situated in Myanmar
The Shwe field was discovered in 2004 and began production in KrisEnergy
KrisEnergy Asia Holdings BV acquired Tullow Oil in 2013 and has  production
capacity of 110 MMCFD in 2015 from  wells from the Bangura gas field in Block ,
Ref Figure 54, onshore Bangladesh ONGC Videsh ONGC Videsh is  wholly owned
subsidiary of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, the national oil company
of India, and is India’ largest international oil and gas & Company ONGC Videsh
operates Blocks SS-09 and SS-04 and holds  45% interest in the production-
sharing contract Partners are Oil India Ltd 45% and BAPEX 10% The company had
completed  2D seismic survey over two Bay of Bengal blocks last year (2016) and
plans to drill the first of two commitment wells on Block SS-09 near Moheshkhali
Island during Posco Daewoo Posco Daewoo is  fairly new player to the oil & gas
business in Bangladesh The company recently signed of PSC with  first entry into
exploration phase  in March 2017 for Offshore Block DS-12 (100 % equity operator
over Acreage of ,560 square kilometres) As per the agreement, two- dimensional
seismic survey would begin this year, and based on the outcomes of the survey,
the real picture of gas availability could be known by According to public
available information, the Korean company would spend $- million for carrying
out  two-dimensional survey, USD5- million for  three-dimensional survey, and
USD50-100 million for drilling wells 86 of 244 Figure 54: Licence Map Source:
Petrobangla Annual Report 87 of 244  Exploration & Licensing  comprehensive
review of the exploration and licensing from 1950 and up to 2006 is presented in
the GSMP (2006) The development since 2006 is presented in the report
“Bangladesh Gas Sector Update” and relevant yearly reports from Petrobangla
Together, these reports provide the basis for the analysis of the exploration
program laid out by both the Public and Private Sectors to enhance gas reserves
In addition, these reports together with data gathered from questionnaires
provided to Petrobangla for completion form the basis for the recommendations to
enhance efficiency and results Early Years Petroleum exploration in Bangladesh,
then part of India, started in 1914, with Burmah and IPPC drilling two wells
each at Sitakund region, 30 km north-west of the district of Chittagong Of the
four, relatively shallow wells, three recorded gas shows During the next 37
years, the only drilling activity was the spudding of two wells by Burmah in
Patharia- and - were located in the very north-east of what is now Bangladesh,
but again encountered only gas shows At this time, exploration was based on
surface geology and drilling near proven surface seeps 1950-1990s  spurt of
activity occurred in the late 1950s and early 1960s when the Rashidpur,
Kailashtilla, Titas, and Habiganj fields were discovered by Shell between
1960–There was little drilling activity through the 1970s as the newly formed
state of Bangladesh established  national oil company, Bangladesh Oil and Gas
Corporation (Petrobangla), to oversee the country' petroleum sector Petrobangla
was later re-organised into Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Mineral Corporation, (BOGMC)
Along with the formation of Petrobangla, the government passed the Bangladesh
Petroleum Act 1974, to promote activity and six offshore production sharing
contracts were signed that year The companies who signed were: ARCO, Ashland,
Canadian Superior Oil (CSO), Bengal ODC, INA, and Union Oil All of these
contracts were relinquished by 1978, following  combination of unsuccessful
drilling, poor incentives and political uncertainty The only success was the
discovery of the offshore Kutubdia gas field by Union Oil (later named Unocal,
now Chevron) In the 1980s there was sporadic activity with only one or two wells
being drilled each year The 1980s saw the introduction of Production Sharing
Contracts (PSC) with the first being signed by Shell in 1981 and the second by
Scimitar in new model of the PSC was introduced in 1988, which was followed by
licensing round later that year, in which the country was divided into twenty-
three blocks The round was unsuccessful, with only Texaco/Unocal JV expressing
serious interest During the beginning of the 1990s, representatives from IOC
started to show interest in exploration in Bangladesh As  result, PSCs for eight
blocks were signed with four companies (Occidental, Cairn, Okland/Rexwood and
United Meridian) 88 of 244 Cairn was the first company to sign  PSC covering
Block 16, including the rights to the offshore Kutubdia gas field Three further
PSCs were signed in Cairn signed  PSC for Block 15 including the development
rights to the Semutang field, and two PSCs were signed by Occidental, the first
covering Block 12 and the second covering Blocks 13 & 14, the latter including
development rights to the Jalalabad field in Block further six companies or
joint ventures signed Memorandum of Understandig (MoU) with Petrobangla These
included: United Meridian, McKinzie Int’ Co, Total, Stellar Oil and
Okland/Rexwood The MoUs were signed for  period of - months, in which the
company could make  technical review of the block before committing to  contract
In 1997, PSCs for Blocks 17 and 18 were signed in by an Okland/Rexwood
consortium and Block 22 by United Meridian Second Exploration Licensing Round:
1997 to 2006 After considerable delays during 1996, bidding on Bangladesh’ long-
awaited second exploration licensing round was opened by the government in mid-
March Although the bidding round officially closed on 15 July 1997, with final
contract signings scheduled for 15 December 1997, it was not until late July
1998 that the first awards were confirmed All of Bangladesh’ remaining open
acreage had been open to bidding as  part of this round, although several
existing fields, all located within blocks  and 10, were excluded from the
bidding These included Kamta, Bakharabad, Meghna and Salda Nadi in Block  and
Begumganj and Shahbazpur in Block An analysis of the bidding process highlighted
the demand for blocks  and 10, with these receiving seven and six bids,
respectively Overall,  total of 37 bids were submitted on 12 of the 15 blocks on
offer Bids were submitted by 21 companies (including Bangladesh state
exploration company BAPEX) The greatest number of bids came from the Cairn/Shell
joint venture with four applications for  total of six blocks Despite the
lengthy delay, the government confirmed the award of only five blocks in its 26
July 1998 announcement This was seen as  direct result of the Bangladeshi
objective of sharing blocks amongst bidders, placing the greater emphasis on
ensuring no company dominated the upstream sector, rather than awarding blocks
based on the individual merits of each bid Successful bidders in the second
round were Cairn Energy and Shell in Block  and Block 10; Triton, Unocal, and
PTI Oil and Gas in Block  Blocks ,  and 23 received no bids, while no licenses
were awarded for blocks , , ,  and BAPEX took part in the round as  carried
partner (10%) with Unocal in Block 10 and with Petronas and Mobil in Block
Later, the government decided to hold  10% carried interest for BAPEX in all the
awarded blocks 89 of 244 Third licensing Round:  The Offshore Bidding Round 2008
was limited to newly-formed deep water blocks and attracted some bids However,
the ensuing maritime boundary dispute in most of the blocks created  stalemate
In this backdrop, two blocks were negotiated with Conoco Phillips and  PSC for
blocks were signed in Conoco Phillips completed the initial seismic survey in
the blocks They relinquished these blocks in 2014 without drilling any
exploratory well Fourth licensing Round:  Following the delimitation of the
maritime boundary between Bangladesh and Myanmar by the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) in March 2012, Petrobangla realigned the blocks
considering the new boundary and announced  bidding round in December
Substantial initial response was received Under this round,  PSCs for shallow
sea blocks have been signed ONGC Videsh, Oil India and BAPEX joint venture has
signed  PSCs for blocks SS-04 and SS-On the other hand, Santos, KrisEnergy and
BAPEX joint venture has been contracted for block SS-Seismic surveys of all
these blocks are in progress Petrobangla has planned to conduct 2D Non-Exclusive
Multi-Client Seismic Survey in the offshore area of Bangladesh to provide the
oil and gas industry with 2D Non-Exclusive Multi-Client Seismic data of the
offshore areas Bids were invited in December However, signing of agreement with
successful bidder is awaiting approval of the Government Bidding for deep sea
blocks DS-12, 16 and 21 has been initiated by the Government After evaluation of
EOIs, Request for Proposal (RFP) has been sent to  short-listed companies Since
the signing of the PSCs, several changes in ownership and restructuring in the
contracts have taken place All of the onshore PSCs have matured from the
exploration phase to the production phase and major areas of the blocks have
been relinquished As of December 2015, PSCs are active in production areas of
blocks 12, 13 and 14 with Bibiyana, Jalalabad and Moulavi Bazar gas fields
operated by Chevron, and block  with Bangura Gas Field operated by Tullow
Efforts to kick-start offshore exploration have generally been thwarted by PSC
terms held to be unacceptable by its IOC partners ConocoPhillips exited deep
water licences DS-10 and 11 despite 2D seismic data reportedly indicating the
acreage could hold - tcf ( bcm) of reserves, according to Energy Bangla (this
report has not been available to Contractors)  subsequent review of the PSC
conditions led to formulating  new offer for 2016 exploration bidding round
Table 13: Summary of PSC of past exploration bidding rounds Bid Round Summary
1974  PSCs were signed for  blocks Block no: IOCs Offshore: Union Oil (Unocal)
Offshore: Atlantic Richfield (ARCO) Offshore: BODC (Nippon Oil) Offshore: Ina
Napthalin Offshore: Ashland Oil 90 of 244 Offshore: Canadian Superior Oil
Company (CSO) No bids received 1993  PSCs were signed for  Blocks Block no: IOCs
15 : Cairn Energy/ Holland Sea search 16 : Cairn Energy/ Holland Sea search 12 :
Occidental 13&14 : Occidental 17&18 : Rexwood-Okland 22 : United Meridian Inc
Result: Discovery of Sangu, Moulovibazar, Jalalabad and Bibiyana gas field 1997
PSCs were signed for  blocks Block no: IOCs  : Shell & Cairn  : Unocal  : Tullow
& Chevron-Texaco 10 : Shell & Cairn Result: Discovery of Bangora gas field in
Block   PSC was signed for  blocks 2008 Bangladesh Block: DS- & DS- Offshore
Bidding IOCs: ConocoPhillips Bangladesh Exploration 10 Ltd Round 2012 Bangladesh
3PSC were signed for  blocks Offshore Bidding Block no: IOCs round SS-04 : ONGC
Videsh-OIL-BAPEX SS-09 : ONGC Videsh-OIL-BAPEX SS-11 : Santos-KrisEnergy-BAPEX
1st Phase of 2016  PSC signed with POSCO Daewoo Corporation for block DS-12
(under special act) 2nd Phase of 2016  EOIs from POSCO Daewoo, KrisEnergy &
Statoil received for DS- (Under special 10, DS-11 & SS-None of them submitted
proposal act) Source: Petrobangla  Seismic data  detailed review of the seismic
data base is presented by Gustavson (2011) (Figure 55) According to this report,
the Pakistan Petroleum Ltd initiated seismic data acquisition in Bangladesh in
1955 primarily in the greater Sylhet district SVOC and Shell’ seismic campaign
started in In 1963, OGDC started acquisition of seismic data All these data were
singlefold, analogue coverage Approximately  000 kilometres of the pre-1971
seismic data are still available 91 of 244 Digital multifold seismic data
acquisition started in 1978 when Prakla was engaged under the German Technical
Assistance Programme In 1978, Petrobangla also started acquiring multifold
analogue seismic data and in 1979 digital data acquisition began Analogue,
multifold seismic data acquisition continued until During , Shell recorded over
,500 kilometres of multifold data available in the BAPEX Data Center From the
early nineties, there was an increase in seismic activity when Cairn Energy
started acquiring data within Blocks 16 and 17 and Occidental in Blocks 12, 13,
and Occidental acquired - surveys across both Bibiyana and Moulavi Bazar Both
Okland Oil and United Maridian Corporation (UMC) acquired seismic data In ,
Tullow acquired 573 line-kilometres of -  data across the Bangora-Lalmai
Anticline They also acquired  - survey of their PSC block in Additional -
surveys have been acquired, are in the process of being acquired, or are
proposed both onshore and offshore NIKO, on behalf of their Joint Venture with
BAPEX, acquired - surveys across Feni and Chattak fields Acquisition of -
surveys of 3320 Sq Km has been completed over Sylhet, Kailashtilla, Rashidpur,
Saldanadi, Sunetra, Shahbazpur, Begumganj-Sundalpur, Nassingdi and Mubarakpur
structures, in order to seismically identify new pay sands and better delineate
the areal distribution of existing pay sands Of newer projects (Table 14), BAPEX
will conduct  000 km 2D seismic survey under proposed project named “Rupokalpo :
2D Seismic Project” from April 2017 to June In early June 2017, BAPEX has called
for Expressions of Interest (EoI) for the acquisition, processing and
interpretation of  3000 Line-km of 2D seismic survey over Exploration Blocks 3B,
6B and  (SI #11 in Table 14) The procurement of multirole survey vessel is
therefore under process for the offshore exploration which will enhance the
coverage as well as new prospect identification for future demands 92 of 244
Figure 55: Seismic coverage of Bangladesh Source: Gustavson 93 of 244  Drilling
data According to the data available for analysis by the Consultants, 81
exploration wells were drilled between 1910 and 2014 (Ref Figure 56) Of these
exploration wells,  total of 21 wells were drilled offshore This exploration
well count, seen in comparison to the over 207 000 km2 of sedimentary basins
currently identified within Bangladeshi territory, represent an extremely low
drilling density in comparison to many other countries The wells have been
typically drilled to approximately  km and have been targeting reservoirs of
Miocene age The Petrobangla Atgram- well is the deepest well in Bangladesh to
date and it reached  TD of  km in For the exploration wells, the average
discovery rate is 36%, 12% contained shows and 52% of the wells were reported to
be dry In overall terms, the general average discovery rate means that
discovery is made for every third well drilled, and thus Bangladesh appears very
favourable for the exploration of hydrocarbon accumulations based on the
historical success rate However, most of the discoveries are very small, and
thus the discovery rate of significant and important fields in terms of gas
volume is much lower The most extensive drilling period after  peak in the early
1990’ies was in the late 1990’ies to early After  peak in exploration drilling
in 2004, the well count has been very low and almost stagnant However,
exploration activities got  momentum as in Since then,  number of new gas
structures have been delineated,  exploration and 43 development wells have been
drilled and workover of 18 wells have been completed However, Petrobangla’
ambition towards 2021 is to increase their activities and  series of projects
involving drilling of 53 exploratory wells, 35 development wells and
workover/remedial of 20 wells by BAPEX is currently approved or in the process
of approval (Ref Table 14) Assuming that all exploration wells by BAPEX are to
be drilled in the period , this means that the drill rate will be close to
exploration wells per year Such high drill numbers have never been realised
before in the oil and gas history of Bangladesh and will if fully implemented,
raise the total exploration well numbers with 164% Data on the commitment by IOC
on drilling are currently under questioning by the Consultants Table 14: Project
and status of wells and their purpose Sl No Project Title Approval Status
Rupkalpa- Drilling Project: three Exploratory well Approved (Haraganj-,Srikail
East- & Salda North-) Two Development Well (Srikail North- , Kashba-)  Rupkalpa-
Drilling Project: Four Exploratory well Approved (Saldanadi South-, Semutang
South-, Batiachar-, Saldanadi East-) 94 of 244  Rupkalpa- Drilling Project: Four
Exploratory well (Kasba- Approved , Madarganj-, Jamalpur-, Shailkupa-)
Rupkalpa- Drilling Project: Two Exploratory well Approved (Shahbazpur East-,
Bhola North-) Two Work-over Well (Shahbazpur-,)  Procurement of one Drilling and
one Work over Rig with Approved Supporting Equipment for BAPEX  Rupkalpa-
Drilling Project: Two Exploratory well (Srikail Approved North-, Mubarakpur
South East-), One Appraisal cum Development well (Begumganj-) and one Workover
(Begumganj-)  Rupkalpa- Drilling Project:  Exploratory Wells (Sariatpur-
Approval Process , Madan- and Sunetra-)  Rupkalpa- Drilling Project:
Exploratory Wells (Dupitila-  Approved , Zakiganj- and Patharia West-)
Rupkalpa-: Equipment Procurement Project (Procurement  Approved of Exploration
and Production Supporting Equipment for Bapex) 10 Rupkalpa-: 2D Seismic Project
Approved 11 2D Seismic Survey Over Exploration Block 3B, 6B &   Approved (Under
Approval Process) 12 Rehabilitation of Gardner Denver  1100 (IPS) RIG Project
Approved 13 TAPP (Technical Assistance Project Proposal): Under Approval
“Engagement of Consultancy Firm for Procurement of Multi-Role Offshore Survey
Vessel” Source: Petrobangla 95 of 244 Figure 56: Bangladesh exploration drilling
history: 2010-Development wells before 2010 are not shown Source: Petrobangla,
Gustavson  Growth trajectory of GIIP in fields The growth of the volume of Gas
Initially In Place (GIIP) versus time from all the discoveries show an increase
from  tcf from the mid 1950’ies to more than 35 tcf in 2012 (Ref Figure 57) The
Consultants are aware that not all discoveries made in Bangladesh may have been
available to The Consultants for the analysis presented in Figure The data
available show that the most recently discovered field contributing to the total
GIIP estimate for Bangladesh is from 2011/The growth curve is very irregular
over the time period and notably two-time periods stand out During the 1960’ies,
the cumulated GIIP of discovered fields rose from  tcf to nearly 20 tcf with the
discoveries of the Titas, Habiganj, Bakhrabad, Kailashtilla and Rashidpur fields
The second period of rapid growth in the cumulated GIIP was in 1998 with the
discovery of the Bibiyana field Since then, discoveries of new fields have not
led to significant gas resources being added to the known GIIP 96 of 244 Figure
57: Discovery ages and cumulated GIIP gas resource Data from Table The Average
growth per year from  has been 500 bcf per year Source: Petrobangla Figure 58:
Size distribution of the Gas Initially In Place (GIIP) of the 26 discovered
fields Source: Petrobangla From the data available to the Consultants (Ref Table
16), it is clear that most of the 26 fields in Bangladesh are small with respect
to its GIIP value (Ref Figure 58) The cumulated GIIP of the smallest 13 fields
thus amounts to only % of the total GIIP for all 26 fields On the other hand,
the cumulated GIIP of the largest 10% of the fields amounts to 56% of the
cumulated GIIP In terms of probability - density relationships then the P90 of
the fields is 65 bcf, the P50 is 654 bcf, the P30 is  000 bcf and the P10 is
800 bcf (Ref Figure 58) 97 of 244 With respect to future exploration activities,
it implies that given  discovery is made randomly [from  selection of prospects
and leads], then there is  50% chance that it will contribute with more than 654
bcf but also  50% chance that is will contribute with less than 654 bcf It will
also be expected that there is  30% probability that the prospect will contain
at least  tcf These calculations assume that the field sizes occur randomly and
only serve to illustrate the nature of the field size distribution If on the
other hand the selection of prospects and leads available are not randomly
picked but sorted and ranked according to risked GIIP sizes, the likelihood of
delivering higher GIIP field sizes increase However, since all prospects and
leads are related with  probability of success the risk of  dry well may or may
not increase by aiming at more high GIIP fields Figure 59: Location of producing
fields and LNG terminals Source: Petrobangla 98 of 244  Gas reserve position
Overview  total of 26 fields are recognised in Bangladesh (Ref Figure 59, Table
15 and Table 16) Since the GSMP (2006) study,  large number of reserve studies
have been made on the Bangladesh fields either using  deterministic material
balance approach or  probabilistic gas reserve approach such as the one followed
by Gustavson (2011) The most comprehensive study of the latter approach
available to the Consultants is presented by Gustavson (2011) This report also
presents the geology of the fields, available data including maps and limited
reservoir pressure data Since the Gustavson (2011) study, new seismic data have
been gathered and better imaging of new and existing fields has been made, and
as  consequence this has enabled better reserve models to be made For this
study, however, no detailed reports of these newer studies and reserve models
have been made available to the Consultants with latest request for data The
Consultants provided Petrobangla with an integrated questionnaire (see Appendix
) requesting this to be completed by its relevant Departments and Subsidiaries
Based on completed questionnaire- responses on the topic and to the best extend
of available data and information, the Consultants have attempted to include the
results from these studied in the current review for the revision of the Gas
Section Master Plan  Reserves Summary It is not the purpose of the Consultants
to perform another reserve study or reserve certification, but rather it is the
purpose to review the available reports and prepare proved, probable, possible
and Yet-to-Find (YTF) production forecasts for the three demand forecasts (Case
,  & ) in  similar manner as was done in the GSMP (2006) in order to evaluate
whether there is likely to be enough gas to meet future demand  summary of the
reserves developed since the GSMP (2006) updated to the most current estimates
are presented in Table In 2006, the latest reserve estimation performed by HCU
in 2004 was used At that time, the estimates of the GIIP of Bangladesh was tcf
distributed in 22 gas fields with  corresponding recoverable reserve estimated
(2P) of tcf (Ref Table 15) In the reserve studies summarised and presented in
the yearly reports by Petrobangla, the GIIP from 26 fields (four additional to
the GSMP 2006 study) in Bangladesh totals tcf with  corresponding recoverable
reserve (2P) estimated of tcf (Ref Table 15) In  study by SGFL from 2012, new
reserves number are presented for the Kailashtilla, Rashidpur and Sylhet fields
based on new 3D seismic mapping (Ref Table 15) The updated reserve significantly
reduces the mid-size Kailashtilla and Rashidpur fields from GIIP values around
tcf each to GIIP values of  tcf and  tcf, respectively The reports for this new
GIIP assessment are not available for the Consultants but nevertheless
demonstrated the importance in acquiring new data in order to detail the
estimation of the resources The SGFL (2012) estimates are used as in the updated
reserve position inventory, which form the basis for the forecasting (Ref Table
16) 99 of 244 Compared to the GIIP estimates and the reserve position presented
in Table 16, the reserve position of almost the same fields has risen by  tcf or
with 25% compared to the values presented in the GSMP (2006) study (Ref Table
15) Such reserve growth cannot be expected to continue since there is  finite
gas resource in place but highlights the uncertainties that are involved and the
need for applying best available data and models when strategic planning is to
be made However, for situations like this where uncertainties on all data
aspects exist within the decision process, special care should be made in not
making too confident predictions but instead remain as flexible as possible in
order to accommodate newer and more accurate data and estimation in the decision
process once they are available Similar to the recommendation in the GSMP
(2006), the update Gas System Master Plan recommends that the Proven + Probable
(2P) reserves are used for short and mid-term planning and that the Proven +
Probable + Possible (3P) reserves together with undiscovered (Yet-to Find)
resources are only used as  guideline for long term strategic planning 100 of
244 Table 15: Summary of Gas Initially In Place (GIIP), Proved +Probable (2P
Reserve) between the GSMP (2006) study and values used in the updated GSMP)
Numbers are in bcf gas As presenetd in GSMP 2006 As persented in BAPEX yearly
reports New 3D seimic mapping Reserve estimated company Reserve estimated year
Recovery factor (2P/GIIP) Reserve estimated company Reserve estimated year
Recovery factor (2P/GIIP) Reserve estimated company Reserve estimated year
Recovery factor (2P/GIIP) Gas Initially in Place (GIIP) Proved + Probable (2P)
Gas Initially in Place (GIIP) Proved + Probable (2P) Gas Initially in Place
(GIIP) Proved + Probable (2P) Field  Producing (Dec 2015)  Titas HCU 2004 7325
70% 5128 RPS Energy 2009 8149 78% 6367  Habiganj HCU 2004 5139 75% 3852 RPS
Energy 2009 3684 71% 2633  Bakhrabad HCU 2004 1499 70% 1049 RPS Energy 2009 1701
72% 1232 SGFL 2012 1748 70% 1224  Kailashtilla HCU 2004 2720 70% 1904 RPS Energy
2009 3610 76% 2760 SGFL 2012 2116 70% 1481  Rashidpur HCU 2004 2002 70% 1401 RPS
Energy 2009 3650 67% 2433 SGFL 2012 666 70% 466  Sylhet/Haripur HCU 2004 684 70%
479 RPS Energy 2009 370 86% 319   Meghna Narsingdi HCU HCU 2004 2004 171 307 70%
70% 120 215 RPS Energy RPS Energy 2009 2009 122 369 57% 75% 70 277  Beanibazar
HCU 2004 243 70% 170 RPS Energy 2009 231 88% 203 10 Fenchuganj HCU 2004 404 70%
283 RPS Energy 2009 553 69% 381 11 Shaldanadi HCU 2004 166 70% 116 RPS Energy
2009 380 73% 279 12 Shahbazpur HCU 2004 665 70% 466 Petrobangla 2011 677 58% 390
13 Semutang HCU 2004 227 66% 150 RPS Energy 2009 654 49% 318 not included 14
Sundulpur Shahzadpur BAPEX 2012 62 56% 35 not included 70% 15 16 Srikail
Jalalabad BAPEX & 2012 1999 240 1491 67% 79% 161 1184 HCU 2004 1195 837 17
Moulavi Bazar HCU 2004 449 80% 360 Unocal 2003 1053 41% 428 18 Bibiyana HCU 2004
3145 76% 2401 & 2008 8350 69% 5754 not included 19 Bangura Tullow 2011 1198 44%
522 20 Begumganj HCU 2004 47 70% 33 BAPEX 2014 100 70% 70 Sum  26388 18963 36644
25815  Non‐producing (Dec 2015) 21 Kutubdia (Offshore) HCU 2004 65 70% 46 HCU
2003 65 70% 46 not included 22 Rupganj BAPEX 2014 48 70% 34 Sum  65 46 113 79
Production suspended (Dec 2015) 23 Chattak HCU 2004 677 70% 474 HCU 2000 1039
46% 474 24 Kamta HCU 2004 72 70% 50 Niko/BAPEX 2000 72 70% 50 25 Feni HCU 2004
185 70% 130 Niko/BAPEX 2000 185 67% 125 26 Sangu (Offshore) HCU 2004 1031 82%
848 Cairn/Shell 2010 900 64% 578 Sum  1965 1502 2196 1227 Sum ++ 28418 20510
38952 27121 Source: Petrobangla 101 of 244 Table 16: Summary of GIIP, Proven,
Probable and Possible reserves, Cumulated production (per December 2015),
remaining reserves (as per January 2016) and recovery factors 2P/GIIP and
3P/GIIP Numbers are in bcf gas Reserve estimated year Gas Initially in Place
(GIIP) Proved + Probable + Possible (3P) Cum production (Dec 2015) Remaining
reserve  2P (Jan 2016) Recovery factor (2P/GIIP) Recovery factor (3P/GIIP) Year
Discovery Reserve estimated company Proved + Probable (2P) Operating Company
Field Proved (1P)  Producing (Dec 2015) Titas  Habiganj  Bakhrabad  Kailashtilla
Rashidpur  Sylhet/Haripur  Meghna  Narsingdi  Beanibazar  Fenchuganj 10
Shaldanadi 11 Shahbazpur 12 Semutang 13 Sundulpur Shahzadp 14 Srikail 15
Jalalabad 16 17 Moulavi Bazar Bibiyana 18 Bangura 19 Begumganj 20 Sum  1962 1963
1969 1962 1960 1955 1990 1990 1981 1988 1996 1995 1969 2011 2012 1989 1997 1998
2004 1977 RPS Energy RPS Energy RPS Energy SGFL SGFL SGFL RPS Energy RPS Energy
RPS Energy RPS Energy RPS Energy Petrobangla RPS Energy BAPEX BAPEX & Unocal &
Tullow BAPEX 2009 2009 2009 2012 2012 2012 2009 2009 2009 2009 2009 2011 2009
2012 2012 1999 2003 2008 2011 2014 8149 3684 1701 1748 2116 666 122 369 231 553
380 677 654 62 240 1491 1053 8350 1198 100 33544 5384 2238 1053 not avaiavle not
avaiavle not avaiavle 53 218 150 229 79 322 151 25 96 823 405 4415 379 14 16033
6367 2633 1232 1224 1481 466 70 277 203 381 279 390 318 35 161 1184 428 5754 522
70 23474 6517 3096 1339 1398 1693 533 101 299 203 498 327 488 375 44 161 1184
812 7084 941 70 27163 4040 2191 789 623 565 208 59 171 91 138 84 19 11  40 995
282 2269 323  12909 2327 442 443 601 917 258 11 106 112 243 195 371 307 26 122
189 146 3485 199 69 10565 78% 71% 72% 70% 70% 70% 57% 75% 88% 69% 73% 58% 49%
56% 67% 79% 41% 69% 44% 70% 80% 84% 79% 80% 80% 80% 83% 81% 88% 90% 86% 72% 57%
70% 67% 79% 77% 85% 79% 70% BGFCL BGFCL BGFCL SGFL SGFL SGFL BGFCL BGFCL SGFL
BAPEX BAPEX BAPEX BAPEX BAPEX Chevron Chevron Chevron Tullow BAPEX
Non‐producing (Dec 2015) 21 22 Kutubdia (Offshore) Rupganj Sum  1977 2014 HCU
BAPEX 2003 2014 65 48 113 46 ‐ 46 46 34 79 46 34 79    46 34 79 70% 70% 70% 70%
BAPEX  Production suspended (Dec 2015) 1959 1981 1981 1996 Chattak Kamta Feni
Sangu (Offshore) Sum  23 24 25 26 HCU Niko/BAPEX Niko/BAPEX Cairn/Shell 2000
2000 2000 2010 1039 72 185 900 2196 265 50 125 544 985 474 50 125 578 1227 727
50 175 639 1591 26 21 62 498 608 448 29 63 80 619 46% 70% 67% 64% 70% 70% 94%
71% NIKO BGFCL NIKO Cairn Sum ++ 35853 17064 24780 28833 13517 11263 Source:
Petrobangla 102 of 244 In terms of the uncertainties connected with the
reserves, it is appropriate to state the SPE definitions: Proved Reserves Proved
reserves are those quantities of petroleum which, by analysis of geological and
engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be commercially
recoverable, from  given date forward, from known reservoirs and under current
economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations Proved
reserves can be categorised as developed or undeveloped If deterministic methods
are used, the term reasonable certainty is intended to express  high degree of
confidence that the quantities will be recovered If probabilistic methods are
used, there should be at least  90% probability that the quantities actually
recovered will equal or exceed the estimate Probable Reserves Probable reserves
are those unproved reserves which analysis of geological and engineering data
suggests are more likely than not to be recoverable In this context, when
probabilistic methods are used, there should be at least  50% probability that
the quantities actually recovered will equal or exceed the sum of estimated
proved plus probable reserves Possible Reserves Possible reserves are those
unproved reserves which analysis of geological and engineering data suggests are
less likely to be recoverable than probable reserves In this context, when
probabilistic methods are used, there should be at least  10% probability that
the quantities actually recovered will equal or exceed the sum of estimated
proved plus probable plus possible reserves The reserves estimates have been
derived using  deterministic approach and therefore probability numbers do not
strictly apply However, for the sake of this discussion there is approximately
10% chance that the proven reserve will be less than stated,  50% chance that
the probable reserve will be less than stated and  90% chance that the possible
reserve will be less than stated For the purposes of near to medium planning
(-10 year), it is recommended that only the proved and probable reserve
estimates be used, whereas for strategic ( year) the 3P and YTF is used in
addition  Production history  diagram showing the historical daily production
data extending back to 1960 has been compiled from the draft report on the Five
Year Gas supply Strategy (Petrobangla, 2015, draft) and is presented in Figure
The historical production data are the cumulated production of all fields at
each year and thus does not show the development of one specific field but
rather the development of the total gas field portfolio in Bangladesh The
production data show  steady increase from low numbers in 1960 to peak values
above 2750 MMCFD reached in 2017 (Figure 60) From here, the forecasted
production from existing fields is expected to decrease The forecasted trend
will be dealt with in Section  103 of 244 Figure 60: Summary of actual average
daily production () and forecasted production (2016- 2041) from existing fields
in Bangladesh Source: Petrobangla To show the rate of produced reserved versus
time then the total production per year has been compared to the total
recoverable (3P) reserve in all fields as recognised to day (Ref Figure 61) This
analysis shows that 25% of the expected ultimate production (3P) in the existing
fields was produced in 2006 at the time of the first GSMP study, that 50% of the
total production was reached nine years later in 2015 and that 75% of the gas
resource in the current producing fields is expected to have been produced
during It thus took 45 years to produce the first 25% of the total production
recognised today, but only  years for the next 25% to be used This acceleration
of the gas usage is an important understanding in why timely decisions are very
important 104 of 244 Figure 61: Cumulated annual production () and forecasted
production () from existing fields in Bangladesh normalised to total present day
expected production Source: Petrobangla  Recovery Factor According to the
literature the theoretical recovery factor for most volumetric depletion
reservoirs with reasonable permeability is that these will produce 70 to 90
percent of the GIIP value (Petroleum Society 1994) However, as stated in the
GSMP (2006) “during the depletion of gas reservoirs, production performance is
affected by many factors The basic characteristics and physical properties of
the gas and its associated constituents or product, and its proximity and
interrelationship to other fluids in the reservoir can either enhance or
adversely affect recovery from the reservoir Recovery factor for gas is related
to the reservoir drive mechanism In the case of  gas reservoir producing by
expansion and without water drive, there is no physical reason why the gas may
not be recovered down to near atmospheric pressure In another way, it can be
said that gas reservoirs under depletion drive can achieve near 100 percent
recovery However, when pressure approaches near atmospheric, production rate
decreases rapidly and becomes uneconomic In the GSMP (2006) study,  recovery
factor for the 2P resource varied between % with the norm of 70% of the GIIP
(Ref Table 16) In the Proven, Probable and Possible (3P) Reserves summary table
(Ref Table 17) the 2P to GIIP factor ranges between % with  mean of 66% The 3P /
GIIP ratio ranges between 76% and 90% with  mean of 78% of the producing fields
In summary, the reported recovery factors are well with the theoretical expected
ranges, however, the very low 2P recovery factors for some of the fields merit
further work Ultimately, the low recovery factors mean that the field is
underdeveloped or that production is faced with difficulties as addressed below
105 of 244  Producing Fields Summary  comprehensive review of the 19 (2016)
producing fields are presented in the work of Gustavson (2012) and for three key
fields in the GSMP (2006) Study undertaken by Schlumberger (2011) for the HCU
analysing individual well performance at individual fields is available for some
of the fields for the Consultants Further, the Consultants have requested
documentation for the summary report from RPS Energy on the reservoir simulation
studies conducted for some of the fields (not received) As started in the
previous section, the Consultants find the individual field recovery factors
within the industry standard for gas fields with good to medium reservoir
properties However, the Consultants agree with the findings in the GSMP (2006)
that GIIP can be difficult to determine with respect to lack of field pressure
data The individual fields are operated to full capacity, which limits the
possibility to obtain field pressure data for decline curve analysis or standard
/ plots for the GIIP estimation Most of the fields also have more than one gas
bearing sands, which challenges the use of / plots as pressure and fluid
communication between individual sands can overestimate GIIP for the individual
sands and then the aggregated value Consequently, the reported recovery factors
are subjected to relatively high uncertainties Overall, the Consultants assess
that the Bangladesh gas field production suffers the general challenge with gas
field development, ;  Gas production is directly linked to the market demand
which limits the possibility to take individual wells off stream for  longer
period to determine reliable shut-in pressure ii As production data acquisition
and knowledge of the dynamics of the reservoir performance starts at day one of
the gas-sale contracts, it is difficult to design an optimum development plan
before production start Especially in  rapidly growing gas market as in
Bangladesh iii When the supply-demand balance is tight, individual fields are
often depleted with respect to demand and not to good reservoir management
practice The Consultants acknowledge the work of Petrobangla to address the
above challenges for future developments and re-developments  draft of the “Five
Year Gas Supply Strategy (Year 2015 – 2019), Petrobangla (2015) was issued to
the Consultants The Consultants recommend taking the following actions for the
future development of Bangladesh gas production:  Incorporate reservoir
simulation studies early in project life to model field performance Both the
geological (static) model and the simulation (dynamic) model must be history
matched regularly to constrain forecast modelling (Start simple and update when
practical feasible) It is imperative that the static modelling captures the
contrasts in permeability rather than  very detailed geology; gas flow is not
that sensitive to small scale heterogeneities but sensitive to large scale
permeability contrasts So initial flow models can be rather simple The
Consultants acknowledges that simulation works are already 106 of 244 ongoing at
several fields, but at present time the documentation for the work is not
available to The Consultants  Simple reservoir simulation models can strengthen
the interpretation of / plots for gas in place evaluations  As production at
full capacity at all time limits the possibility for data acquisition for
reservoir characterisation, evaluation of production performance, re-evaluation
of GIIP and adjusted development design, it is imperative to gain excess
capacity in the production line to take individual wells of-stream  Insufficient
structural knowledge makes well location uncertain and field depletion risk to
be ineffective Compartmentalisation on some fields is also an issue Accelerated
decision and sanction for 2D/3D seismic surveys for proper field delineation and
detection of reservoir sands are imperative and worth the investment  Water
production challenges the production strategy/rates; water encroachment can
maintain reservoir pressure but can also immobilise gas volumes as residual gas
The Habiganj field is an example; reservoir simulations can interpret the strong
water drive in the Upper Sand to return  more reliable GIIP Further, how fast
can the gas be produced with minimum residual gas volume left behind  Current
production is based on technology which has matured and developed – introduce
new technology such as horizontal drilling, hydraulic fracturing in tight
reservoirs in order to maximise outputs from fields  Insufficient well
dimensions and number of wells can challenge production rates and thereby the
possibilities to take individual wells of-stream for  longer period for
reservoir surveillance  Proper reservoir management can increase field
performance,  plan for data acquisition and early development up-date, reservoir
simulation, history matched on regularly basis, down hole gauge pressure
monitoring, well shut-in for pressure build-up (reservoir pressure), PLT logging
(identify non-producing zone, re-completion), water production monitoring - risk
of well shut down due to liquid hold-up, regular well maintenance and workover
Production augmentation; well tubing size and down-hole constrictions, well
completion (shuts per inch, secure completion over all pay zones), fines – and
water production surveillance, THB below transmission pressure  installation of
compressor Plan for final field blow-down Re-evaluate well design, tubing
dimensions and flow constraints down-hole Most IOCs tubing design is  inch,
whereas Petrobangla design corresponds to  inch or even  inch Moreover, monobore
should be considered for shallower wells to reduce cost and increase production
at the same time  Country supply – production forecasts Long-term gas production
() scenarios have been provided to the Consultants from Petrobangla and its
subsidiaries as response to questionnaires sent out in the beginning of the
study The forecast is based on material balance deterministic approach and the
uncertainties involving in these estimates shall not be underestimated The
forecasts are all slightly different 107 of 244 from each other but all predict
stable to slightly decreasing production from existing fields, and after
approximately five years  rapid decline in production is expected to occur (Ref
Figure 60) The development in short-term production forecasts is not the main
focus here, as it is also dealt with in reports such as the Five Year Gas supply
Strategy Pertrobangla, 2015) and fields based production forecasts Here the long
term (+10 year) strategic planning is in focus The specific forecast used here
for each producing field was provided as part of the data return on the
questionnaires sent to operating companies In addition to this, the Consultants
have reviewed the available reserve data and have produced  number of forecasts
based on the reserve data supplied by Petrobangla (Note all forecasts are
financial year forecasts): “Proved” remaining reserves of  tcf (Table 16, note
this number is excluding the  Kailashtilla, Rashidpur, Sylhet fields since
these are not provided) “2P” remaining reserves of tcf at end December 2015 (Ref
Table 16)  “3P” remaining reserves of tcf at end December 2015 (Ref Table 16) 
As in the GSMP (2006) study, the objective of forecasting the gas supply here is
to determine:  whether Bangladesh is self-sufficient in meeting its gas demand
 when new discoveries will need to come on-stream and the required volreserves
needed to fill any shortfall  In the following, three gas supply scenarios are
presented and examined: Case  – Proven, Probable and Possible (3P) Reserves This
scenario represents best utilisation of existing fields with no additional
resources found Case  – Proven, Probable and Possible (3P) Reserves with YTF
contribution This scenario represents best utilisation of existing fields with
YTF contribution of  tcf The YTF contribution has been provided to the
Consultants as BAPEX new, Shallow offshore, Deep Offshore Case  – Proven,
Probable and Possible (3P) Reserves with an additional YTF contribution This
scenario represents best utilisation of existing fields with an YTF contribution
based on the report from Gustavson (2011), whereas it is anticipated that
approximately  tcf can be produced until 2041 according to the Consultants
investigation The YTF contribution has been estimated by the Consultants from
the available reports combined with an expectation from the upcoming and
accelerated future exploration activities announced by Petrobangla and its
subsidiaries Reserve growth in this model is 1000 bcf per year reflecting twice
the average historical rate seen in Bangladesh (Ref Figure 57)  We believe newer
figures may exist 108 of 244 The conclusion in all scenarios (,  and ) is that
the domestic gas production cannot meet the future gas demand as projected by
the Consultants and thus LNG import in various amounts will be needed to fill
the demand gap  Case  – Proven, Probable and Possible (3P) Reserves The
production forecast for the period  as presented for the Consultants indicates
that the gas production per day is 2500 mmcf until 2022 whereafter the
production quickly diminishes (Ref Figure 62) This production estimate reflects
field development plans either approved or planned The field development plans
have not been available to the Consultants The Consultants has projected the
addition 2P reserve not accounted for in the forecasted production schemes
provided For this “additional 2P” production no development plan exists for its
production and thus depends on future development Consequently, no short-term
production increase is expected based on this additional 2P reserve although
mid to long terms additional production is expected to occur provided the needed
development The total potential for the additional 2P reserve is  tcf Fields
with highest reserve within the additional 2P class and thus currently
forecasted in the operator’ production forecast are the Rashidpur and Semutang
fields (Ref Table 17) Figure 62: Case  – Proven, Probable and Possible (3P)
reserves production forecast Source: Petrobangla 109 of 244 Table 17: Summary of
GIIP, cumulated production (per December 2015), planned production in the
forecast for  and the additional 2P and 3P reserves not included in the forecast
for  but used in production forecast scenarios ,  &  Cum Gas production forecast
(2016 ‐ 2041) Recovery factor (Past and Planned Produced / GIIP) Cum production
(Dec 2015) Total past and planned production Recovery factor (2P/GIIP) Recovery
factor (3P/GIIP) Gas Initially in Place (GIIP) Addtional 2P Addtional 3P Field
Producing (Dec 2015) Titas Habiganj Bakhrabad Kailashtilla Rashidpur
Sylhet/Haripur Meghna Narsingdi         8149 3684 1701 1748 2116 666 122 369
4040 2191 789 623 565 208 59 171 2325 564 265 675 419 90 11 95 6365 2755 1054
1298 984 299 69 266 78% 75% 62% 74% 46% 45% 57% 72% 78% 71% 72% 70% 70% 70% 57%
75% 80% 84% 79% 80% 80% 80% 83% 81%  152 342 285 100 709 234 32 33 178 498 167
11  10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Beanibazar Fenchuganj Shaldanadi/salad Shahbazpur
Semutang Sundulpur Shahzadpur Srikail Jalalabad 231 553 380 677 654 62 240 1491
91 138 84 19 11  40 995 34 118 29 336 13 26 115 580 126 256 113 355 24 36 154
1575 54% 46% 30% 52% % 57% 64% 106% 88% 69% 73% 58% 49% 56% 67% 79% 88% 90% 86%
72% 57% 70% 67% 79% 77 125 166 35 293 77 242 214 133 351    17 Moulavi Bazar
Bibiyana 18 Bangura 19 Begumganj 20 Sum  1053 8350 1198 100 33544 282 2269 323
12909 56 4201 248 36 10236 338 6471 571 37 23145 32% 77% 48% 37% 41% 69% 44% 70%
77% 85% 79% 70% 90 474 613 370 33 4409 33 1682  Non‐producing (Dec 2015) 21 22
Kutubdia (Offshore) Rupganj Sum  65 48 113    33 33  33 33 % 68% 70% 70% 70% 70%
46  46 46  46  Production suspended (Dec 2015) 23 24 25 26 Chattak Kamta Feni
Sangu (Offshore) Sum  1039 72 185 900 2196 26 21 62 498 608 449  60  509 475 21
123 498 1117 46% 29% 66% 55% 46% 70% 67% 64% 70% 70% 94% 71% 252 29 52 141 474
29  80 111 Sum ++ 35853 13517 10778 24296 1840 4929 Source: Petrobangla 110 of
244 For long term strategic planning 3P reserves from existing fields is an
important asset to include Based on the forecast for the period  including the
additional 2P reserve the 3P reserve amounts to additional  tcf for all
producing fields (Ref Table 17) Fields with  large 3P reserves includes the
Rashidpur and Bibiyana fields The 3P reserve may, if unlocked, extend the
production period of the fields but it is not expected to contribute to the
short term daily production However, due to the significant volumes within this
reserve class, production above 1000 MMCFD may be extended to 2036 (Figure 62)
This reserve needs additional field development and may also be viewed as
“technological dependant” reserve  Case  – Proven, Probable and Possible (3P)
Reserves with  tcf YTF contribution In the “Gas Production Augmentation Plan ()”
provided to the Consultants, production from “yet-to-be-found” reserves from
onshore and shallow offshore and deep offshore fields has been forecasted based
on expectation in upcoming exploration The contribution of the YTF is expected
to provide  tcf from new onshore fields and  and  tcf, respectively for shallow
offshore fields and for deep offshore fields The additional of the YTF resource
is expected to impact production both on short, medium and long term Addition of
new production is in the forecast expected to kick-in already from 2017 and is
expected to keep production above 3000 MMCFD until 2025 where also production
from shallow offshore is expected With the new YTF production rates above 2500
MMCFD is expected until 2031 (Ref Figure 62) The details in these expected YTF
by BAPEX and the assumptions behind the impact on the strategic reserve forecast
are not available to the Consultants Most important is to know the reserve
status used and the risking that is attached to the estimates Assuming, however,
that it represents 2P reserves with  70% recovery, the fields reflect GIIPs
between - tcf The gas demand forecasted by the Consultants shows that gas demand
will not be lower than 4000 MMCFD from 2017 and on For this it is clear that the
Scenario  will thus never meet the gas demand and that the supply gas will
exceed 1000 MMCFD growing to more than 2000 MMCFD from 2019 (Ref Figure 63,
BAPEX Forecast) 111 of 244 Figure 63: Case  - Proven, Probable and Possible (3P)
Reserves with YTF contribution to the production forecast Source: Petrobangla
Case  – Proven, Probable and Possible (3P) Reserves with 34 tcf YTF contribution
The YTF potential in Bangladesh is evaluated in Section  The analysis shows that
there is  significant YTF resource available in the country The resource is
available both as conventional gas but also thin-bed resources at existing
fields As reviewed in Section , an ambitious exploration program has been
approved by the Government of Bangladesh and is currently being implemented by
Petrobangla and its subsidiaries Based on these initiatives, the Consultants
find that  scenario with  higher YTF contribution than presented in Scenario  is
justified The historical data from Bangladesh demonstrate that with  drilling
rate of - exploration wells per year an average GIIP growth rate of 500 bcf was
achievable This was obtained with an uneven yearly drilling rate The exploration
success was also unevenly distributed over the past 60 years (Ref Figure 56 and
Figure 57) The basic assumption in Scenario  is that  structured and well-
planned exploration strategy can increase the average GIIP growth rate well
above 500 bcf per year As LNG import has been sanctioned by the government, the
demand for accelerated indigenous gas supply is to some extend relaxed This can
leave time for in-depth & work before seismic acquisition and drilling campaigns
are executed  beneficial balance between pace and preparatory work can be met On
the short term, the Consultants acknowledge the announced  years exploration
drilling campaign by BAPEX, but stress that the drilling operations must be
prioritised based on  qualifying & work program 112 of 244 the Consultants
recommend starting with the low risk areas,  areas with  proved petroleum system
and then work around to more frontier areas  constant evaluation on the volume
of available drilling rigs and & staffs in general must be taken in order to
avoid any bottle-neck issues Further details and assumptions for the YTF
potential are presented in Section  In Figure 64 the “BAPEX New” production is
included in the different “YTF areas” and in to the “thin bed” production Figure
64: Case  - Proven, Probable and Possible (3P) Reserves with 34 tcf YTF
contribution to the production forecast Description for the assumptions for the
individual YTF areas ( to ) is detailed in section  below Source: GEUS  Yet to
Find Resources (YTF) The existence and advanced geological analysis of yet to
find resources by two independent sources “USGS-Petrobangla Joint Study dated
2001” and “Final Updated Report on Bangladesh Petroleum Potential and Resource
Assessment 2010” by Gustavson (2011) allow The Consultants to review the yet-to
find resources The Consultants also place emphasis on the discussion on the YTF
presented in the report “Bangladesh Gas Sector Update” The GSMP (2006) included
review of the various YTF Gas Resource methodologies and the reader is directed
to this report and the report by Gustavson (2011) for further in-depth analysis
of methodology The USGS-Petrobangla (2001) study is  systematic and extensive
study that represents the earliest and best study to assess the Bangladesh’
undiscovered gas resource potential This study determines that the undiscovered
gas resources of Bangladesh range from  tcf (95% probability) to 66 tcf (%
probability) with  50% probability of finding 29 tcf and  mean of 32 tcf 113 of
244 The study by Gustavson (2011) provides the current most updated and best
document study to evaluate the YTF resource for this report The existing
producing fields occur for the most parts within the Eastern Fold Belt but
potentially prospective area also exist in the Western Fold Belt in addition to
shallow and deep offshore areas (Ref Figure 65) In Gustavson study mapped leads
and prospects are presented together with unmapped prospects The risked resource
is estimated to range between 34 tcf (90% probability) to 80 tcf (10%
probability) In additionl to this estimate, conventional resource and
unconventional resource is expected to be present in Bangladesh and is estimated
to range between  tcf and 19 tcf (Table 18) Table 18: Summary of Risked Gas
Resource Estimates Gas Resources Bcf Type of Resources P90 P50 P10 Identified
Prospects 12510 19295 28259 Identified Leads 21844 34057 49719 Unmapped 65 443
2548 Total Prospective Resources 34419 53795 80526 Shale Gas and Shale Oil 4007
9392 18931 Coalbed Methane 346 426 522 Total Contingent Resources 4353 9818
19453 Source: Gustavson (2011) For the purpose of supply planning the
recommendation in the GSMP (2006) study was that the P95 YTF resource estimate
should be used At that time this estimate amounted to  tcf In this updated GSMP,
The Consultants recommend that the P90 YTF estimate of tcf provided by Gustavson
(2011) should be used given its more detailed nature of the study Further, it is
not the scope of the present update of the gas master plan to present  new and
exhausting resource assessment for Bangladesh The Consultants assess the
volumetric probability resource estimate of Gustavson (2011) to be the present
best update In order to unlock this potential, the prospect inventory compiled
by Gustavson (2011) needs to be explored systematically in order to prove up the
potential undiscovered volumes This needs to be done on an ongoing basis to
ensure that the potential resource is converted into proved reserves and
developed in time to meet the supply shortfall, especially since the YTF
resource has an even greater level of uncertainty than possible reserves (3P) In
addition to the Total Prospective Resources (Table 18), Gustavson (2011) also
provides estimates on the Thin-Bed-Resources at existing fields (Ref Table 19)
This resource varies from  tcf (90% probability) to 27 tcf (10% probability) The
resource is thus potentially significant but with much higher uncertainties than
the prospective YTF resources In the long term strategic planning, this resource
should therefore not be considered Nevertheless, it illustrates that additional
potentials exist for future field developments and field tie-in Exploration here
will see if this resource can be un-locked and turned into proven resources 114
of 244 Table 19: Summary of Thin Bed Resources (TBR) at existing fields Gas
Resources Bcf P90 P50 P10 Bakhrabad  611 1521 Bangora  288 695 Beanibazar  61
159 Fenchuganj  123 339 Habiganj  1311 3195 Jalalabad  593 1531 Kailash  1220
3015 Moulavi  406 1064 Narshingdi  98 255 Rashidpur  1438 3676 Salda  118 322
Sangu  323 792 Shahbazpur  122 300 Sylhet  171 440 Titas  3516 8575 Chattak  204
591 Feni  44 163 Kamta  16 49 Meghna  25 75 Begumganj  14 74 Kutubdia  21 53
Semutang  149 368 Sum  10872 27252 Source: Gustavson (2011) 115 of 244 Figure
65: Mapped prospects, leads and discovered fields Source: Gustavson (2011) In
addition to conventional resources, unconventional shale gas and coal bed
methane amounts to  tcf (P90) according to the studies by Gustavson (2011) These
resources are currently not included in the strategic forecast but  study named
“Feasibility study for the extraction of coal bed methane (CBM) at Jamalganj
Coal field” showed that resource is not likely available at economic scale 116
of 244 YTF resource and sectoring of Bangladesh The YTF resource estimate
provided by Gustavson (2011) did not allow for  geographical subdivision of the
P90 estimate of 34 tcf Such geographical breakdown of the YTF was provided by
the USGS (2001) study This study clearly shows that the most prospective areas
are the geological stretches where the existing fields are located Here, the
geological structuring of the subsurface allows for well-defined relatively
large four-way closures In areas to the west of the country, the geological
structuring is less pronounced leading to less distinct closures The current
exploration activities are reflected in the licencing currently taken (Ref
Figure 54) and in the seismic data coverage (Ref Figure 55) This shows that part
of the country has had  long exploration history whereas other parts are almost
virgin territories To reflect the two above characteristics of Bangladesh, the
country has been divided into seven sectors (Ref Figure 66) The definitions and
basis characteristics are presented below and in Table Timing and planning of
future exploration activities in Bangladesh are crucial for  successive
indigenous gas reserve growth The Consultants take  deterministic approach using
the already gained exploration and development experiences As the P90 estimate
from Gustavson (2011) is risked resource estimate, the Consultants evaluated the
probability of success (PoS) for the different areas and use the PoS to setup
timing for exploration planning (Table 20) Table 22 presents  recommended time-
frame for exploration activities for the YTF areas in the short- and mid-term
time interval Prioritisation and timing are crucial for the success of
discovering and developing new prospects and plays with respect to the limited
resources available (number of drilling rigs etc) The Consultants have
prioritised the different areas  –  in Figure 66, rating the areas with the
lowest exploration risk the highest priority The time-frame is developed knowing
that the near future gas supply for Bangladesh involves import of LNG This gives
unique opportunity for planning & work in  timely matter, so future seismic
acquisition surveys and drilling campaigns can be done on  prioritised list of
prospects 117 of 244 Figure 66: Division of Bangladesh into seven areas (-)
based on past and present exploration activities and seismic data availability
118 of 244 Description of the YTF areas: Area : Located onshore and includes
most of the producing fields Potential for rapid new resource to come on stream
are thin-beds (- tcf) and near field exploration (- tcf) that may be tied-in
within existing infrastructure Furthermore, - tcf (P90) of additional YTF that
may come relatively quick on stream (-10 years) The PoS for the thin beds are
30% due to the risk of missing seals For new explorations, Area  has  proven
petroleum system and an assessed low risk for exploration (PoS = 33%) An overall
recovery factor of 70% is projected, but thin beds will have  substantially
lower expected recovery (20%) Area : Located onshore and includes most of the
remaining producing fields not in Area  It has  proven petroleum system and low
risk for exploration (PoS = 31%) It has expected - TCF (P90) of YTF that may
come relatively quick on-stream (-12 years) Potential for rapid new resource to
come on stream are thin-beds (- tcf) together with Area  and near field
exploration that may be tied-in within existing infrastructure  recovery factor
of 70% is projected Area : Located shallow offshore and contains previous
production fields It has  proven petroleum system and low risk for exploration
(PoS = 31%) and is currently under exploration by IOC It has expected - TCF
(P90) of YTF that may come relatively quick on-stream (- 10 years) if tie back
to existing Sangu field is possible, otherwise  timeframe of  years  recovery
factor of 70% is projected Area : Located onshore It has no producing fields and
medium risk for exploration Currently under exploration by BAPEX (PoS = 23%) It
has expected - TCF (P90) of YTF that may come on stream ( years) from now
recovery factor of 70% is projected Area : Located onshore It has no producing
fields and  high risk for exploration since  working petroleum system has not
been proven (PoS = 13% Currently the area is not under exploration It has
expected - TCF (P90) of YTF that may come on-stream ( years) from now  recovery
factor of 70% is projected Area : Located shallow offshore It has no producing
fields and  high risk for exploration since  working petroleum system has not
been proven (PoS = 13% Currently the area is not under exploration It has
expected - TCF (P90) of YTF that may come on-stream ( years) from now  recovery
factor of 70% is projected 119 of 244 Area : Located deep offshore It has no
producing fields, but newly discovery in block DS-12 prove up  working petroleum
system (PoS = 31%) Only limited information was available from this area to the
Consultants YTF may come on stream ( years) from now The long development period
is due to the deep offshore configuration  recovery factor of 70% is projected
Production profile including the YTF areas is presented in Figure For Area ,
and  the main structure is already drilled and new play types and testing of
other types of accumulation have to be made It is recommended to perform semi-
regional studies to also include exploration models from neighbouring India Full
utilisation of acquired 3D seismic data should be made For Area  and  there is
relatively spars data coverage by 2D regional lines and need for collection of
3D seismic data of structures is urgently needed to be able to make  prioritised
prospect list for drilling selection for this sector Table 20: Risk factors to
assess Probability of Success (PoS) for the different areas and thin beds
Source: GEUS 120 of 244 Table 21: Characteristics of the seven areas in
Bangladesh Source: GEUS, Ramboll 121 of 244 Table 22: Recommendations and
priority for the seven areas in Bangladesh Source: GEUS, Ramboll 122 of 244
Review of GSPM 2006 In 2006, the GSMP depicted  scenario in which peak gas
production will occur 10 years ahead  in  (Ref Figure 67) According to their
models, the peak gas would be followed by rapid production decline of the
existing fields According to the models and best judgments at that time, peak
production was anticipated to be slightly above 2500 MMcfpd This production
level was not anticipated if the difficult 3P reserve of existing fields was
converted to Proved reserves and if not  significant amount of new production
from YTF fields was put on stream (Ref Figure 67) Figure 67: Demand Case  –
Production Forecast, from GMSP (2006) The analysis provided by the Consultants
has shown that the models and expectations with regard to peak gas timing and
level of production forecasted in 2006 was remarkably true However, our analysis
shows that the conversion of 3P reserves to Proved reserved and the additional
of YTF field to be produced after depletion of existing fields will not be
sufficient to meet the future demands in gas To maintain  high degree of
domestic production requires  strong exploration commitment The Consultants can
see that there is  strong awareness of the importance of showing due diligence
with respect to finding new resources The Bangladesh Government has made an
action plan towards 2021 to raise the exploration activities since the lack of
reserve growth is  consequence of reduced exploration activities - activities
that were greatly reduced in the crucial time after All evidence suggests that
there is large YTF resources both offshore and onshore Bangladesh As it takes
about  years for  discovery to be turned on stream, these resources cannot help
the current gas supply shortage and hence the need of LNG-terminal capacity will
be important in securing that future demands in gas can be reached 123 of 244
Analysis of the exploration program by public sector Many recent discoveries
have been made within the last decade but none of significant size The
historical high success rate for discoveries in Bangladesh may suggest that easy
predictable field have been in focus However, future exploration success will
depend on unlocking more difficult settings and plays The field size structure
in Bangladesh favours many small fields and only few mid to large fields exist
The historical GIIP growth has been 500 bcf per year obtained from - exploration
drilling per year It is recommended that Petrobangla prioritises target
structures that may have higher risked GIIP volumes preferentially in order to
reserve growth to speed up The ranking of to-be-drilled structures should be
made based on  risking process that documents the uncertainties associated with
the GIIP estimate The Consultants have not seen  list of risked GIIP structure
aimed with the 53 exploration wells that are mentioned to be drilled within the
years to come Specifically, The Consultants recommend targeting  risked field
size that lies within the P30 range of current fields This may raise the ratio
of unsuccessful drilling but will also lead to higher growth rate of GIIP vs
time Furthermore, this will also ensure  more restricted spending of development
costs to fewer but perhaps larger fields that ultimately may provide higher
resources per well successfully placed in the field The Consultants acknowledge
the ambitious exploration program committed by the Government of Bangladesh but
find based on the drilling history and on the fact that carefully geophysical
and geological (&) work has to be made in planning and selection for each drill
location that focus should not be on the drill number but rather on the quality
of the prospect evaluation and section criteria Seismic data To shoot non-
exclusive seismic for the offshore area, it is very important to open up for
activities The Consultants urge for speeding up the process It is the
Consultants’ general understanding that 3D seismic data have been acquired over
all major fields The Consultants have, however, not seen the data or evaluation
reports on the value gained from the studies Apart from field optimisation, the
evaluation of this data set is important for identification of near field
exploration Drilling The number of drill rigs onshore are now three with one
planned to be acquired These numbers of rigs may be too few to allow for the
needed high number of exploration and development wells to be drilled
Petrobangla has ensured that drill rigs will be optimally operated but also that
drill expertise from elsewhere is mobilised to ensure that the ambitious
exploration is not halted However, it is important that exploration wells are
drilled from  carefully prepared and prioritised list Preparing the needed work
and selecting drill site for  high degree of wells will demand very skilled work
Focus should be on reserve growth rather than well drilled Time to prepare new
prospect models inspired by recent successes as wells as successes in
neighbouring countries is 124 of 244 well spent Preparing of semi-regional
studied involving all stakeholders in Bangladesh is recommended to help in
keeping  high level in the prospect-to-drill inventory  Analysis of the
exploration program by private sector The YTF resource in Bangladesh is
significant and most likely at least of similar size order of what is currently
under production Significant investments are, however, needed to develop these
new assets Given the expected decline in current production and expected
dependence on LNG, energy related activities are needed in many parts of
Bangladesh As  consequence, the private sector exploration activities and its
investment will be an increasingly important component in the future development
of the gas sector in Bangladesh Moreover, the activities and work-knowledge from
this sector is likely to have  positive stimulation on the public-sector
activities The results of the licence rounds clearly show that the interest in
the areas is real and widely acknowledged by IOC The efforts in acquiring non-
exclusive 2D seismic coverage on  large part of the offshore area by Petrobangla
are the first very important step to attract IOC and to enable local efforts to
evaluate the area It is the Consultants’ judgment that better delineation of the
structures and thus of the potential GIIP will help gaining  common
understanding between the Bangladesh Government and IOC in signing for PSC for
Block areas  Key recommendations for gas supply augmentation Based on the
analysis of the existing producing fields in Bangladesh and the exploration -
and development programmes for the country – the Consultants assess the
potential for an increase in indigenous gas supply to be high and to be
valuable contribution to the overall gas demand/supply balance The Consultants
find the following recommendations essential for the realisation of the future
indigenous gas supply: Production augmentation from existing fields possible by
increasing number of wells and well completions in producing zones New well must
have increased tubing size and deviated wells must be considered in low
permeability formations   State of the art reservoir management, including
both static and dynamic reservoir characterisation and modelling, is essential
to optimize reservoir performance and securing high recovery Field re-
development should include an evaluation of thin-bed resources as well as deeper
prospects to tie-in to existing infrastructure for early production  
Exploration potential still huge in Bangladesh; majority of the country
unexplored but assessed to be hydrocarbon bearing To unlock exploration
potential,  systematically and risk based approach is necessary to best utilise
resources; prioritised exploration campaigns opening in less uncertain areas and
moving to more frontier areas  Intensified and focused & work calls for
systematic capacity building and human resource strengthening  national plan for
capacity building must be launched and prioritized;  125 of 244  Mandatory to
increase number of & expert staff to monitor and re-develop producing fields
Exploration and development of new fields with state of the art technologies
calls for interdisciplinary human capacities Increase expertise in drilling
techniques and well completions Increase and strengthen cooperation between
academia, national institutions and IOC for knowledge transformation and –
experiences    Mandatory to attract IOCs for investments and technology
transferring to develop deep offshore areas  Mandatory for the country to
invest in multi-client and open seismic surveys to prepare for bidding rounds 
Consecutive bidding rounds to open up for new licences; processed and open data
packages must be available for the applicants 126 of 244  LEAST COST SUPPLY
SOLUTION  Overall supply and demand It is established in the previous chapters
that the gas production from existing fields in Bangladesh is expected to start
declining in coming years, while the demand is forecasted to be  to  times of
current level by If nothing is done, the demand-supply gap will continue to
widen (illustrated below), forcing Bangladesh into  severe energy crisis Figure
68: Gas demand and indigenous supply (existing discoveries) 12,000      Demand -
Scenario  10,000 Demand - Scenario  Demand - Scenario  ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000
Additional 2P & 3P Production Existing Fields Production    -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -     To avoid such  scenario, it is necessary for Bangladesh to
consider adding gas supply through both indigenous production enhancement and
exploration, as well as imports via LNG and pipelines LNG import, even FSRUs,
will take some time to put into operation, thus there is likely to be  supply
shortage in the short-term In the long-term, significant additions to the
indigenous supply are not likely to materialise until appropriate measures such
as proper drilling programs and upgrade of human resource capacity have been
achieved We estimate this to be in the range of - years from today However, the
expected output will in all likelihood be higher than if the current short-term
focused programs are maintained The supply-mix strategy will be discussed in the
later paragraphs In this chapter, we will first present some indicative net
costs of supply from Yet-To-Find (YTF) potentials in Bangladesh, imported gas
through pipeline from Myanmar, and imported LNG To make the cost comparisons
meaningful, we consider the underlining net cost of gas to Bangladesh For
example, assuming the upstream gas price for some indigenous production is
$10/mcf where the upstream tax and/or government profit share is $/mcf, the net
cost to Bangladesh will therefore only be $/mcf In contrast, if some imported
gas costs $10/mcf, the cost to Bangladesh would be the entire $10/mcf 127 of 244
Figure 69: Indicative Net Cost of Supply (excluding all Bangladesh taxes)
@USD60/bbl Oil Source: Ramboll Figure 70: Bangladesh acreage map by areas
Source: Ramboll 128 of 244 As shown in Figure 69 above, in the USD60/bbl global
oil market environment, the net costs of Bangladesh’ YTF potentials are
estimated to be between USD0/mcf and $/mcf, depending on the geological location
Meanwhile, the net costs of imported gas from Myanmar and international LNG are
estimated to be USD5~/mcf and USD5~11/mcf respectively Notwithstanding the
exploration risks and large volume uncertainties in the YTF gas resources,
Bangladesh’ potential indigenous supply appears to be  more economical option
than imports, and it should be explored and assessed in depth The methods in
deriving these indicative net costs of supply are as discussed in the sections
below  Indigenous Supply – Yet-to-Find (YTF) Resources As discussed previously,
there are still considerable gas potentials in the indigenous resources in
Bangladesh Based on historical data and references to both Bangladeshi and
international projects, we have derived our assumptions (see Figure 71 and
Figure 72 below) for new field discoveries/developments in Bangladesh It shall
be noted that there have been  lack of exploration and development activities in
Bangladesh historically Based on these limited data and reference, there are
large uncertainties in our assumptions and they should be revised when more
information becomes available Figure 71: Resource & production assumptions
Resource & Production (Mean Case) Onshore Offshore AREA  &       GIIP bcf ,000
,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,500 Recovery Factor 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% 70% Recoverable
Resource bcf 700 700 700 700 700 ,750 EUR per well bcf 175 175 175 175 175 175
Plateau Production mmcfd 200 200 200 200 200 400 Probability of Success (PoS)
32% 23% 13% 31% 13% 31% Development Time (Post Discovery) years       * The &
PoS is an average of PoS for Area  and PoS for Area  Figure 72: Upstream cost
assumptions Cost (USD million) Offshore Onshore AREA  &       Seismic & Studies
10 10 & Wells (per well) 15 15 15 30 30 50 Total & (sesmic &  wells) 32 33 33 65
70 110 Development Wells (per well) 15 15 15 30 30 60 Facilities (sweet gas, no
H2S, no CO2 and low N2) 15 15 15 15 15 ‐ Offhsore Platform ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ 500
Pipeline (trunk) cost per km , , , , , , Pipeline ‐ Onshore (10‐50km)  10 20 ‐ ‐
‐ Pipeline ‐ Offshore Shallow Water (100km) Pipeline ‐ Offshore Deep Water
(200km) Opex per year (% of the total Capex) ‐ ‐ % ‐ ‐ % ‐ ‐ % 100 ‐ % 100 ‐ % ‐
400 % There have been 26 gas fields in Bangladesh, with  P50 GIIP of 654 bcf and
Pmean (average) GIIP of ,379 bcf For the YTF resources, we assume that the
discoveries have an average GIIP 129 of 244 of ,000 bcf for Area -, and an
average GIIP of ,500 bcf for Area  reflecting the expectation that only large
prospects will be drilled in deep water blocks This assumption consequently
implies fewer explorations and discoveries in Area  than other areas We also
assume  Recovery Factor of 70% across all upstream acreages,  new generic field
in Areas - will therefore produce 700 bcf of gas and  new generic field in Area
will produce ,750 bcf of gas For simplicity, no liquid productions are assumed
for future discoveries As discussed previously, we define the net cost of gas
supply as the net cost to the country, excluding any taxes and profit shares
taken by the government This is also the net profit per unit of gas that an
upstream investor needs to receive so that  project is attractive enough for
them to invest To calculate this, we assume the investment hurdle is met when
EMV/& = , where: EMV = Expected Monetary Value of the project for the investor =
PoS*(NPV10 of the project if successful) – (-PoS)*& PoS = Probability of Success
& = Exploration and Appraisal cost (incl seismic) In essence, we assume that
exploration and appraisal investments are made when the risk adjusted project
value (EMV) is equal or greater than the exploration and appraisal cost (&) The
net gas price required by the investor in this case can therefore be derived at
this investment hurdle, this is also the economic net cost of supply to
Bangladesh as mentioned above It should also be recognised that the exploration
risks and uncertainties in GIIP can change when more information becomes
available after each additional exploration The economic net cost of gas can
therefore change accordingly For example, if  10tcf field is discovered in
deep-water block, it will likely increase the PoS and the expected size of
potential discoveries in neighbouring blocks – the economic net cost of gas of
these blocks will therefore go down accordingly One practical implication of
such scenario is that Bangladesh can design  highly competitive PSC in order to
attract IOCs to invest in  or  of its offshore blocks, and the fiscal terms can
be revised and tightened up for other blocks once  significant discovery is made
Import from Myanmar According to the EIA, most of Myanmar’ current gas output
comes from four offshore basins: the Yadana, Yetagun, and Zawtika fields in the
Moattama basin, and the Shwe field in the Rakhine Basin Myanmar’ proved gas
reserves have increased dramatically since 2012 (see Figure 73), thanks to large
investments from IOCs in offshore exploration and appraisal programmes in the
country In 2016, Myanmar’ total proved gas reserve increased to 42 tcf (through
new exploration and appraisal activities), six times as much as that of
Bangladesh For example, the state-run 130 of 244 Myanmar Oil and Gas Enterprise
(MOGE) and Australian stakeholder Woodside Petroleum announced in 2016 the
discovery of two large natural gas wells at opposite ends of the Rakhine Basin,
in Block - (Woodside 40%, Total 40%, MPRL 20%) and Block AD- (Daewoo 60%,
Woodside 40%) It is worth noting that Block AD- is right next to Bangladesh’
deep-water block DS-12 which has been recently awarded to Daewoo International
Corporation Figure 73: Proved gas reserve and production history in Bangladesh
and Myanmar 10 50 )    ( )     /    ( Production - Bangladesh ()
Production - Myanmar ()  40 Reserve - Myanmar ()   Reserve - Bangladesh ()
30  20  10
Source: BP Statistical Review 2017 131 of 244 Figure 74: New discoveries in
Myanmar Source: EIA, Woodside, Ramboll Most of Myanmar’ natural gas production
is exported to Thailand and, more recently, to China According to EIA, the
natural gas exports to Thailand accounted for roughly three-quarters of Myanmar’
natural gas exports, totalled around 340 bcf/ (932 MMCFD) in Natural gas exports
to Thailand are supplied from the Yetagun, Yadan, and Zawtika gas fields The
Zawtika project is the newest of Myanmar’ major offshore gas projects, with
Thailand’ PTTEP launching commercial operations in the second half of The
project exports natural gas to Thailand as well as serves Myanmar’ growing
domestic market 132 of 244 Meanwhile, the natural gas exports to China commenced
in mid-2013 with the development of the first phase of the Shwe natural gas
project in the Rakhine Basin In 2015, the Shwe field produced over 182 bcf (500
MMCFD) of natural gas, and Myanmar exported about 138 bcf (378 MMCFD) of gas to
China by pipeline in the same year Myanmar and China have constructed twin crude
oil and gas pipelines running from Myanmar’ port of Kyaukphyu to Kunming in
southwestern China  consortium of Asian oil companies, including the China
National Petroleum Corporation, commissioned the onshore natural gas pipeline
with  capacity of 424 bcf/ (,160 MMCFD) to carry exported gas from the Shwe gas
project to China Myanmar’ natural gas production is forecasted to rise as new
offshore projects come online The capacity of the China-Myanmar pipeline (784
MMCFD) is likely to be surpassed by additional gas production from these new
field developments, creating spare gas (currently uncontracted gas) for
potential export to Bangladesh Such spare gas can be of significant size as IOCs
in Myanmar continue making new discoveries and proving large reserves Figure 75:
Myanmar gas production Spare Gas ,676mmcfd (circa ,000bcf/) 784 China (unfilled
capacity) ,892mmcfd (circa 700bcf/) 378 China (filled capacity) 932 Thailand 582
Myanmar Year 2015, (mmcfd) Source: BP Statistical Review 2017, EIA, Ramboll
Based on our experience on projects in Myanmar, we estimate well-head price for
Myanmar offshore gas to be around USD4~/mcf in the USD60/bbl oil price
environment We estimate the Myanmar to Bangladesh transmission tariff to be max
USD1/mcf, the gross cost of Myanmar gas for Bangladesh is therefore estimated to
be around USD5~/mcf  LNG Given the uncertainties and lead time in developing the
indigenous supply and pipeline gas imports from Myanmar, LNG undoubted offers
greater flexibility and security in gas supply for Bangladesh However, LNG is
also expected to be the most expensive option 133 of 244 Bangladesh can choose
to source its LNG supply from both the spot market and long-term contracts (~10
years) The spot market LNG price is determined by market dynamics,  short- term
demand fluctuations and marginal cost of supply Meanwhile, many long-term LNG
contracts are directly linked to oil price ( Japan Customs-cleared Crude (JCC))
and others are mostly based on US Henry Hub price; negotiations for some new
project are said to be based on  hybrid of JCC and Henry Hub,  new projects in
Mozambique and Canada as well as contracts with portfolio sellers  IOCs Spot
Market Figure 76: Spot LNG DES prices in Europe and Asia, USD/mmbtu Source:
European Commission Quarterly Report on European Gas Markets, Q1 2017 As shown
in Figure 76, spot LNG prices are highly sensitive to global market conditions
For example, the spot LNG price in Japan was as high as USD20/mmbtu in February
2014 and plunged to only around USD4/mmbtu in early 2016, as  combined result of
weak demand in Asia, increasing global supply, and the fall of oil price Similar
trends are also observed in Europe although less dramatic During the  winter,
Asian LNG prices rebounded to around USD9/mmbtu as  result of the cold weather,
as well as  number of disruptions, including an outage at Train  of Australia'
Gorgon facility lasting more than  month (from late November to early January)
Prices fell back from February as demand weakened while Australian and US output
continued to grow The total global traded LNG reached  historical high in 2016
at 258 MT  MT increase from the previous year, according to IGU There is
consensus in the market that the global LNG demand will continue to grow
However, such growth in demand is most likely to be outpaced by the increases in
supply capacity up to 2020, as additional liquefaction capacities are scheduled
to come on stream in Australia and US over this period 134 of 244 As  result of
this persisted oversupply of LNG up to 2020, we expect the spot LNG price during
this period to be around USD4~/mmbtu at DES in Bangladesh, which gives USD5~/mcf
ex- regas terminal However, the spot LNG price beyond 2020 is difficult to
forecast and subject to greater uncertainties Long-term Contracts According to
our market intelligence, major LNG buyers like Japan are currently able to
secure long-term LNG supply at -12% to oil price for Delivered Ex Ship (DES)
contracts, while such slope is % for smaller buyers like Pakistan We expect
Bangladesh to achieve similar terms as Pakistan with  price formula as the
following: LNG DES = %*Oil +  The significant shale gas production in recent
years has turned the US from an LNG import country to an LNG export country,
with the first export project commissioned in early The pricing for such LNG is
different from the conventional oil linked formula (Brent linked) but based on
Henry Hub price instead The LNG pricing formula for US gas can be expressed as
below: LNG DES = Henry Hub + Pipeline Tariff + Liquefaction Tariff + Shipping We
assume the regasification tariff to be USD0/mmbtu for the LNG receiving
terminals in Bangladesh Adding this tariff to the LNG DES prices, we can
estimate the ex-regasification terminal prices for the potential LNG arrives at
Bangladesh At USD60/bbl oil price environment, we calculate that an oil-linked
LNG long-term contract costs Bangladesh USD9/mcf, whereas  Henry Hub based long-
term contract costs USD10/mcf We also assume that long-term contract LNG via
India terminals to Bangladesh requires additional USD1/mcf for transmission,
therefore it would cost USD10~11/mcf when it reaches Bangladesh Table 23: LNG
price estimates for Bangladesh Pipeline & Liquefaction Tariff Oil Price HH Price
Shipping & Insurance ex‐Regas Price ex‐Regas Price LNG Long‐term Contract
Pricing FOB Price DES Price Regas Tariff $/bbl $/mmbtu $/mmbtu $/mmbtu $/mmbtu
$/mmbtu $/mmbtu $/mmbtu $/mcf Oil Linked Price @$60/bbl 60 ‐ ‐ ‐  80   Henry
Hub‐based Price @$/mmbtu      80  10 LNG via shared terminals with India Plus
$/mcf Transmission Tariff from India to Bangladesh 10 ~ 11 Source: Ramboll NB:
assume  mcf = 028 mmbtu It should be recognised that, as  new and relatively
small LNG buyer, Bangladesh may be offered less favourable terms for long-term
LNG contracts To improve its negotiation position, we recommend Bangladesh to
consider () making joint purchase agreements with its neighbour countries, (ii)
balance its LNG supply portfolio with multiple suppliers, (iii) balance its LNG
supply 135 of 244 portfolio also with purchases from the spot market, and (iv)
avoid destination clause in the long- term contracts, so that Bangladesh has the
flexibility to resell the LNG to other markets when there is no or less need for
LNG or when there are markets where the gas price is higher Any success in
securing pipeline gas imports from Myanmar and other countries should also help
to improve Bangladesh’ bargaining power in the LNG market Traditional LNG long-
term contracts tend to cover 20 years at large volumes However, new LNG buyers
tend to sign for much shorter-term contracts at smaller volumes (see Figure 77),
due to the uncertainties in the gas demand as well as upstream exploration in
their respective countries Such approach can also be adopted by Bangladesh to
create greater flexibilities Figure 77: Global LNG long-term contracts Source:
Shell LNG Outlook 2017  Short-term Strategy (2017 – 2021) In the short term, it
is clear that the only secured option to increase supply is LNG imports There
can be additional production from thin bed sections of the existing fields as
well some new discoveries in Bangladesh, however, such potential productions are
coupled with significant uncertainties It is also clear that the LNG import
through Excelerate and Summit (,000 MMCFD total capacity, assuming 800 MMCFD
maximum average throughput) will still not be sufficient to meet the demand 136
of 244 Figure 78: Short-term Supply and Demand Balance Demand‐Supply Balance,
with Further Upstream Success Demand‐Supply Balance, No Further Upstream Success
,000 ,000           ,500 ,500 Demand ‐ Scenario  Demand ‐ Scenario  ,000 ,000
Thin Bed/ BAPEX Acc Expl ,500 ,500 LNG LNG ,000 ,000 ,500 ,500 ,000 ,000 ,500
,500 Existing Fields Production Existing Fields Production ,000 ,000 500 500
Source: Ramboll Therefore, the Consultants support additional LNG regasification
terminals to be commissioned by 2021 where possible,  Reliance FSU (500 MMCFD)
As discussed, long-term LNG contracts are linked to oil price, while the spot
LNG price is likely to be kept low up to 2020 due to the oversupply situation in
the global market; hence spot LNG is likely to offer more competitive prices
during this period Therefore, the GSMP Consultants recommend Bangladesh to
import maximum quantity of LNG as its infrastructure allows, with majority of
the LNG to be purchased from the spot market while small quantity from long-term
contracts, creating  price and risk adjusted portfolio It needs to be recognised
that the gas demand of Bangladesh is unlikely to be fully met during this
period, due to infrastructure (LNG terminals and Transmission system)
limitations However, the development of infrastructures should be given high
priority in order to avoid persistent infrastructure bottlenecks in the medium
and long term  Medium-term Strategy (2021 – 2030) Figure 79: Medium-term Supply
and Demand balance Demand‐Supply Balance, No Further Upstream Success
Demand‐Supply Balance, with Further Upstream Success ,000 ,000           Demand
‐ Scenario  Demand ‐ Scenario  ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 Yet‐to‐Find (P90) Subject to
exploration sucess ,000 ,000 Import Requirement ‐ High ,000 ,000 Import
Requirement ‐ Low ,000 ,000 Additional 2P & 3P Additional 2P & 3P Existing
Fields Production ,000 ,000 Existing Fields Production     -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -     Source: Ramboll 137 of 244 In the medium
term, more gas can be imported through additional LNG regasification terminals
in Bangladesh as required In addition, Bangladesh can make connections to LNG
terminals in India, utilising spare capacities of these terminals If such
pursuit with India is successful, the southwestern region of Bangladesh can
benefit from an accelerate gas supply at  large volume There can also be
additional indigenous gas production if Bangladesh is successful in exploring
its yet-to-find resources Moreover, Bangladesh can also greatly benefit from gas
imports (via pipeline) from Myanmar, if it can successfully secure gas contracts
from new discoveries in Myanmar The Consultants also recommend the Bangladesh
authorities to pursuit pipeline gas imports from Iran and Turkmenistan, although
there are many challenges and the negotiations and developments can be  gradual
and slow process Nevertheless, successes in securing pipeline gas imports will
likely to offer Bangladesh more affordable prices, as well as strengthen its
negotiation power in LNG purchase Given the inherent uncertainties in the yet-
to-find resources in Bangladesh, we recommend  flexible approach in sourcing its
gas imports For example, Bangladesh can negotiate for shorter contract length
and flexibility in volumes for its long-term LNG contracts, so that it can
easily reduce the level of LNG imports if indigenous gas explorations turn out
to be very successful Similarly, more pipeline gas and LNG imports should be
pursuit if the early signs of indigenous gas explorations do not appear
encouraging As discussed previous, the oversupply situation in the global LNG
market may start to change after 2020, which in turn affects the price
differentials in spot LNG and long-term contracted LNG The Consultants therefore
recommend Bangladesh to keep fine tuning the balance of its LNG portfolio in
order to minimise its spending From  financial prospective, it could be
rewarding for Bangladesh to invest more in its indigenous gas potentials, if
there are not enough IOC investments Looking at this in context, if long-term
contracted LNG costs Bangladesh around USD10/mmbtu at ex-regasification
terminal, the purchase of LNG at 800mmcf/ (3tcf/yr) will cost over USD3 billion
for  single year Such amount of money could be used to finance large exploration
and development programmes both onshore and offshore, where significant yet-to-
find potentials are expected Bangladesh can also consider acquiring interests in
projects from where it imports its gas, favourable acquisition costs can be
achieved under current oil price This could also help to hedge against possible
high oil and LNG prices in the future, as Bangladesh would be buying gas from
its own oversea assets  Long-term Strategy (2031 – 2041) Our recommendation for
the long-term strategy is largely  continuation of the medium-term strategy 138
of 244 Figure 80: Long-term Supply and Demand Balance Demand‐Supply Balance, No
Further Upstream Success Demand‐Supply Balance, with Further Upstream Success
,000 ,000           Demand ‐ Scenario  Demand ‐ Scenario  ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000
,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 Import Requirement ‐ High ,000 ,000 Import
Requirement ‐ Low ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 Existing Fields + Additional 2P & 3P
Production Existing Fields + Additional 2P & 3P Production     -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -     Source:
Ramboll However, as the demand for gas grows, it can be  practical challenge to
import enough gas if little indigenous gas is developed Take  somewhat extreme
example, Scenario  forecasts Bangladesh’ gas demand to be ,346 MMCFD ( tcf) in
2041; assuming all of such demand is supplied with LNG, it will require 10~15
regasification terminals to be built in the limited region of Bangladeshi coast
The cost of such LNG import would also be significant: at USD10/mmBtu, it would
cost Bangladesh more than USD30 billion in that year Therefore, it re-enhances
the recommendation for Bangladesh to pursuit rigorous exploration and
development programmes on indigenous yet-to-find resources as well as pipeline
gas imports It needs to be recognised that these options have  longer lead time
than LNG imports Therefore, Bangladesh is recommended to start developing such
options at the earliest possible date Since the official submission of this Gas
Sector Master Plan, Bangladesh has made speedy and impressive progress in its
LNG import development, some of the key achievements are outlined in Appendix
139 of 244  TRANSMISSION INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN  Gas transmission infrastructure
planning Gas transmission planning in Bangladesh is moving from serving the
indigenous production with demand mainly around Dhaka to  system based on
combination of production and import of LNG and connections to India and Myanmar
for import of gas According to the scope of work, the main activities with
respect to transmission system is to review and mature the following:
“Transmission infrastructure plans of Petrobangla, GTCL and other state-owned 
entities, including inter alia issues to be addressed in the context of
extension of network to the West and South Zone, including  Review of the
identified options for incremental capacity expansion of the existing gas
transmission infrastructure to cope with the projected growth in demand in the
short-term  Review of the adequacy of the stand-alone pipeline projects to
serve the demand of the so far un-served market, in particular supplies to new
power plants and to the West and South Zone; and  Completion of spatial
assessment of further expansion needs  Analysis should provide project-by-
project details on CAPEX and OPEX, including the timelines needed to develop
each segment of the infrastructure” As part of the work, the GSMP Consultant has
worked with GTCL to obtain information and obtain access to plans and
feasibility studies The GSMP Consultant got access to operational reports for
the recent years and three feasibility reports Further, the GSMP Consultant
worked with the GTCL experts on pipeline studio flow model for steady state
simulation of the transmission system In comparison with the GSMP 2006, there
has been an increase in production and consumption of gas This means that
Bangladesh has moved to another league with respect to gas infrastructure and
instead of smaller pipelines connecting fields and consumption, there should now
be  focus on creating  major backbone connecting the new LNG import terminals
with the existing system and allow space for future growth Whereas the GSMP 2006
was much focused on recommending compressor stations to help bringing the
domestic production from north to south, the present plan is more tilted towards
increase in pipeline transmission capacity and hereby also creating line-pack
for short term intraday storage The proposed transmission plan is guided and
developed by the following principles and parameters:  Need for flexibility of
the system as the future production and import mix is uncertain The system
should hence be developed with  high focus on flexibility 140 of 244  High gas
demand in comparison to area – Bangladesh gas consumption by area is in line
with Germany and already three times higher than France and Denmark Within the
planning period, the gas density will become in line with UK and Japan in the
medium term and The Netherlands in the long term Location of demand is uncertain
which suggests large diameter pipelines as it would make it possible to connect
new consumers  High cost of land and hereby high cost for right-of-way, which
will favour large diameter pipelines and offshore pipelines  Technically, the
main challenges are crossing of rivers, flooding and environmental impact
Relatively constant gas consumption over the year as compared to countries using
gas for heating This ensures  high utilisation of gas pipelines and focus should
therefore be on gas pipelines rather than compressors, which will have  high
operational cost if market prices shall be paid for fuel gas  Need to meet
demand in all parts of the country, in particular the Western and Southern part
of the country  Integration with India and Myanmar, and hereby ensuring the
possibility for import of gas  Natural gas transmission fundamentals Gas
transmission – economics of scale The foreseen increase in Bangladesh gas demand
makes it possible to achieve economics of scale to bring down unit transmission
cost So far, the largest installed pipeline in Bangladesh is 36”, while 42”
pipelines are planned For comparison, the largest onshore pipelines normally
used in Europe are up to 56” However, for practical reasons the pipeline
diameter is often limited to 48” In Bangladesh, the main technical hindrance for
use of large diameter pipelines will be the crossing of rivers by horizontal
drilling Here it is possible to have difference in diameter between crossings
and the rest of the system, which will require additional valve stations and pig
launchers/receivers The economics of scale is due to the difference in capacity
and cost as function of diameter The capacity of  pipeline is proportional with
^, while the cost is almost proportional with the diameter Consequently, the
largest possible diameter pipelines will be the preferred solution if the
capacity can be used Even if the pipeline capacity is not fully used during the
initial years, there will be advantages as less use of compressors and line-pack
141 of 244 Transmission and line pack –  dynamic approach for short term storage
The main purpose of the transmission pipelines is to transport gas from entry to
exit points in the integrated system However, due to the interday variation in
the gas consumption with highest electricity consumption and production during
the evening, there is not  constant flow in the system In order to maintain
constant production from gas fields, it is therefore necessary with short term
storage of gas This is also provided in the pipelines by increasing pressure
during night and decreasing during day and evening The line pack capacity
ensures the short-term storage for variation in consumption during the day The
maximum line pack capacity is: Line pack (max) = volume of the gas pipeline
system * Max-Min operational pressure As an example,  42” pipeline with 100 km
length will have  line-pack capacity of approx 100 mmscf, assuming  pressure
difference between 100% and 50% of design pressure  24” pipeline will only have
third of this line pack capacity Design and operational pressure The Bangladesh
gas transmission system has in general been designed for an operational pressure
of 1000 psig The new system is designed for 1135 psig (78 bar) This is in line
with some European countries, while some new European pipelines are designed for
higher pressure up to 1500 psig In view of the interconnection with the existing
gas transmission system in Bangladesh, we find it reasonable to use 1135 psig
For offshore pipelines it will be possible to use higher pressure, up to 2000
psig or more 142 of 244 Gas or electricity transmission – balance between power
and gas master plan New power plants are one of the drivers for new gas
transmission projects, as the alternative is to locate power plants close to the
gas sources and transport electricity with higher losses To illustrate the
choice between power and gas transmission; - 42” pipeline – capacity 1000
mmscf/day – 15,000 MW - 400 kV AC overhead line  MW Assuming an efficiency of 50
percent for  power plant, it will hence require up to 15 overhead lines to
transport the same amount of energy as  large diameter gas pipeline For
Bangladesh this is relevant for the location of the power plant when starting
import of LNG Should the power plants be located close to the LNG import or
should gas be transported to power plants distributed over the country In the
PSMP2016,  number of power plants are foreseen close to the LNG import as no
certainty was given for gas transmission The aim of this update of the gas
sector master plan is to create sufficient gas transmission capacity to secure
distributed location of power plants In the overall economic optimisation, the
cost of gas and electricity transmission should be combined and optimally
combined plan should be developed As this is outside the scope for the present
study, the aim has been to give flexibility with respect to location of power
plants 143 of 244 Onshore versus offshore gas pipelines Bangladesh has the
possibility to install offshore pipelines in combination with onshore pipelines
This includes connection to offshore field development on shallow and deep
water, but also offshore pipelines in parallel to the coast from the LNG import
terminals to the Western part of Bangladesh The advantages of offshore pipeline
versus onshore are that it can be shorter and can be designed to higher pressure
Further, the offshore gas pipeline can be used as  manifold for future
connections of offshore gas fields The advantages of onshore pipelines are that
there is less need for advanced offshore installation equipment and that onshore
gas pipelines can be looped in sections as the need occurs In any case, one
onshore pipeline is needed to supply the gas consumers along the coast from LNG
import to Chittagong and further to the centre of the country Land acquisition
and Right of Way Land acquisition and Right of Way constitutes significant part
of pipeline cost Examples available show  range from 15 to 40 % for different
diameters of pipelines Typically, the need for land is not much different for
different diameter pipelines, which gives incentives to install large diameter
pipelines  Underground gas storage, small scale LNG and biogas  Underground gas
storage With the introduction of LNG, there will be increased dependence of
external gas supply and of the weather conditions It can be expected that the
LNG terminals will only be operational between 80 and 90 percent of the time
Underground gas storage of larger onshore LNG storage can ensure the continuous
supply of gas One of the options is to convert existing gas production fields to
underground gas storage This can be on- or offshore gas fields As an example,
the offshore Sangu gas field could be converted to underground gas storage In
this case, compressors and process facilities could be located onshore Hereby,
the compressors 144 of 244 can be used for normal line compression when not used
for injection into the storage The feasibility of such gas storage should of
course be investigated before any decision, to date we are not aware of any
relevant studies The cost of conversion of the offshore gas field to underground
gas storage is assessed in the order of 200  USD There is  need to develop the
concept before accurate numbers can be given Underground gas storage has not
been explicitly modelled in pipeline studio  Small scale LNG When LNG import is
established, it will be possible also to use small scale LNG for peak load
plants in the western part of the country and for supply to part of the country
not yet connected by pipeline This can be done by barge transportation along the
rivers As an example, it will be possible to use LNG barges to transport gas to
Khulna for peak load supply and hereby obtain  better utilisation of the overall
pipeline system LNG can also be used for ship and heavy road transport Small
scale LNG has not been explicitly modelled in pipeline studio  Biogas Biogas may
become  considerable gas supply in Bangladesh In some European countries up to
10 percent of gas supply is coming from biogas produced on manure, wood or other
sources In Bangladesh the infrastructure is still lacking and no input is taken
into account in the modelling and planning  Existing and planned gas
transmission system  Existing system The existing gas transmission system in
Bangladesh has been developed over the last four decades based on the indigenous
gas production and has grown organically by adding more new gas transmission
pipelines and compressor stations 145 of 244 Figure 81: Bangladesh gas
transmission system 2016 Source: GTCL Consequently, the system is most developed
in the North-Eastern part of the country with connections to Dhaka, while the
South and the West of the country has less developed gas transmission systems
Due to the historical development of the system, the pipeline dimensions are
small, with most pipelines having  diameter of 30” and less This system has
suited the historical supply/demand 146 of 244 situation with  total daily
consumption of up to 2500 mmscf The demand has been higher, but has not been
served due to lack of supply The challenge for the future gas transmission
system is that the Bangladesh gas market will change in the following ways: 
Growth in gas demand Import of natural gas, via:  LNG import facilities located
south of Chittagong at Moheshkhali  Import via pipeline from respectively:  -
Myanmar - India Location of new demand centres more evenly distributed over the
country with new gas fired  power plants and industries also in the South and
Western part of the country As the demand of natural gas will increase in the
coming years, there is  need to install large diameter gas pipelines in order to
achieve economies of scale and limit the number of pipelines in order to take up
less space  Projects under implementation and planned pipelines  number of
pipeline projects are under implementation, according to information from GTCL
Table 24: GTCL list of gas transmission under implementation Dimention: (Dia
Length) MAOP (psig) Implementation Period Location (District) Serial No Pipeline
Under Implementation Name of Pipeline Dhanua‐ Elenga and West bank of Bangobandu
Bridge ‐ Nolka Gas Transmission Pipeline Project Anowara‐Fouzdarhat Gas
Transmission Project Padma bridge Section Gas Transmission Pipeline Project
Gazipur, Tangail, Sirajganj 30"  20 km 42"  00 km 42"  15 km July 2014 ‐ June
2017 April 2016 ‐ December 2018 Chittagong July 2015 ‐ June 2018 1135  1135
Munshiganj, Sariatpur Chittagong, Feni, Comilla, Chandpur ‐
Chittagong‐Feni‐Bakhrabad Gas Transmission Pipeline Project Maheshkhali‐Anwara
Gas Transmission Parallell Pipeline Project 36"  00 km July 2016 ‐ June 2019
1135  42"  00 km July 2016 ‐ December 2018 Chittagong, Cox' Bazar 1135  Source:
GTCL, Petrobangla, 2017 The aim of these pipelines is primarily to create
strong pipeline connection from the future LNG receiving terminals in the south
to the Dhaka area 147 of 244 GTCL has also planned  number of gas pipelines
Table 25: GTCL list of proposed gas transmission pipelines 2017 Serial No
Pipeline Under Implementation Dimention: (Dia  Length) MAOP (psig)
Implementation Period Location (District) Name of Pipeline Kutumbopur‐
Meghnaghat Gas Transmission Pipeline Project 2nd Bangobandu (Railway) Bridge
Section Gas Transmission Pipeline Project Comilla, Munshiganj, Narayanganj 30"
00 km July 2017 ‐ June 2020 1135  36"  00 km July 2019 ‐ June 2022 Tangail,
Sirajganj ‐  Narayanganj, Munshiganj, Sariatpur, Faridpur, Madaripur, Gopalganj
Langalband‐Mawa and Janjira‐Gopalganj‐ Khulna Gas Transmission Pipeline
Bogra‐Rangpur‐ Nilphamari Gas Transmission Pipeline Project 30"  00 km January
2019 ‐ December 2021 ‐  Bogra, Rangpur, Nilphamari 24"  00 km July 2018 ‐ June
2020 ‐  Zero point – Maheshkali CTMS  42”  00 ‐ Maheshkali ‐ Source: GTCL,
Petrobangla, 2017, The aims of these pipelines are to strengthen the connection
from the future LNG terminals and to create connection to the West of the
country This also includes creation of an east-west connection As described in
the supply chapter about pipeline connections from Myanmar and India, there is
possibility to connect Bangladesh from Myanmar via the same pipeline which will
be used for the LNG import The most obvious connection from India will be in the
western part of the country to Khulna from Haldia in India Later on, there will
be possibilities to connect with India in the North-West In our analyses of the
need for new gas transmission systems, we assume that the projects under
implementation and proposed Table 24 and Table 25 will be implemented as planned
In some cases, our analyses show that larger diameter pipelines should be used
than proposed by GTCL 148 of 244  Transmission system modelling The transmission
model aims to evaluate the capacity of the existing pipelines network that is
used to supply Bangladesh with gas The model is also used as  tool in order to
investigate new pipeline sizes and routings within Bangladesh This investigation
will make sure that from  technical stand point it is possible to meet the
predicted increase of gas demand to different geographical areas within the
Bangladesh gas transmission system The model will fundamentally be used to run
various scenarios on infrastructure based on the future gas demand and supply
forecast  Simulation tool As the world standard for gas transmission system
simulations, Pipeline Studio™, provides design and operations analysis for
complex gas pipeline networks  Pipeline Studio™ (gas) model for the country of
Bangladesh’ current transmission system has been built together with GTCL This
includes the complex looped network system containing the multiple intakes from
the individual gas fields, the main city gate delivery points, the major gas
consumers as well as the compressor stations The simulator incorporates advanced
numerical solutions, detailed equipment modelling, and  graphical configuration
environment as shown in the example in Figure Figure 82: Bangladesh Gas
Transmission Pipeline Network Model 149 of 244 This model is to be used for
designing any new required pipelines, to give an overall hydraulic analysis of
the system network and to give an analysis of alternative development scenarios
in line with future projections  Model Input data The model was built in
conjunction with GTCL where their engineers supplied the exact input data and
information required to represent the current operating infrastructure The gas
qualities considered for the system evaluations are given in Table Table 26: Gas
composition for capacity evaluations Name Value [Unit] Specific Gravity  Heating
Value 1000 Carbon Dioxide  % The diameters and lengths for the existing
pipelines are summarised in Table 61 in Appendix  The operational conditions
considered for the capacity evaluations are summarised in below Table Table 27:
Operational conditions and assumptions for the pipelines Parameter Units Value
Comments Operational conditions System Minimum Operating psig 300 Operation data
shows lower cases Pressure System Maximum Operating psig 1050 Pressure Pipeline
inlet temperature ° 65 Maximum Compressor barg 1030 ELENGA, ASHUGANJ & MUCHAI
Discharge  Short term modelling with proposed new pipelines 2021 The Consultants
have performed an analysis of the gas transmission system for the foreseeable
short term focusing on the proposed projects up until 2021 and using the The
Consultants production and demand forecast for 2021 from the previous sections
It is to be noted that only  steady state analysis has been performed and in
reality the system is dynamic Details of the modelling assumptions are given
below Other model Assumptions: ) The steady state is achieved by adding or
increasing capacity wherever bottlenecks are identified 150 of 244 ) Indigenous
gas production is 2639 MMCFD; ) Up to 1500 MMCFD of -LNG is available at
Moheshkhali; ) Up to 500 MMCFD of -LNG is potentially available from Odisha via
70 km border pipeline with INDIA; ) Total gas demand is 4610 MMCFD; ) Gas fields
can meet 1030 psig; ) Gas is available via the cross-border connections at 1050
psig The transmission system is able to operate and supply the following amount
of gas to each region: Bakhrabad 518 Jalalabad 482 Karnaphuli 657 Pashchimanchal
175 Sundarban 524 Titas 2254 Total 4610 The first key finding in the short term
is that with the transmission system as 2021 there will be challenges in meeting
demand with  potential short fall of around 500 MMCFD Theoretically, this
shortfall could be spread out over the entire country However, realistically,
the shortfall in gas will be felt mostly at the end of the transmission system,
specifically in Khulna in the SGCL franchise area, as gas either from the south
east or from the north east would have to be transported across the country to
reach the west If this area is prioritised at the expense of another area, the
Elenga compressor station would have to be turned on The best solution for
resolving the potential shortfall in volumes and corresponding transmission
capacity has been identified and comprises of  pipeline from India (connection
at Khulna), an additional 3rd LNG terminal in south east at Moheshkhali and
large onshore pipeline connection Moheshkhali to the west of the country via
system loop with pipelines from Langlband to Khulna The GSMP Consultant
recommends the pipeline from India to Khulna as this connection will increase
system stability, security of supply, and strengthen the bargaining position of
Bangladesh towards external suppliers Given the supply and demand situation in
2021, we recommend  third LNG terminal at Moheshkhali This will trigger  need
for additional transmission capacity from Moheshkhali It can be argued whether
this should be an offshore or onshore pipeline solution Ideally from  technical
perspective, we would recommend the offshore pipeline; however, this will take
more time to plan and execute It is also most likely that the onshore pipeline
can be completed in the short term and therefore given the urgency required for
meeting the short-term demand capacity It is recommended to pursue the onshore
solution first The onshore solution also has the advantage that it can be built
in sections and that investment money largely stays within the country However,
the offshore pipeline is still to be required in the mid/long term strategy, so
it is recommended to start feasibility studies immediately for this 151 of 244
Figure 83: Short term additional investments Source: Ramboll The second key
finding of the short-term modelling is that if the India connection is not
built, more volumes and capacity are needed which will need to come from the
south east at Moheshkhali with  4th LNG terminal (triggered by the additional
volumes) With the current plans for LNG, the 4th terminal is likely to be  land-
based terminal – in that case reaching completion by 2021 will be difficult
Alternatively, the volumes could be secured by connecting the transmission
system with Myanmar (also from the south east); however, we also doubt this can
realistically be achieved by In any case (Myanmar or  4th LNG), the transmission
capacity would need to be expanded System optimisation and usage of existing
compressor stations Finally, depending on the exact delivery demands and supply
locations, it may be beneficial to lower the pressure at Ashuganj/Muchai
compressor station in order to help the gas flow from the south east of the
country to the west  more detailed study is required to definitively determine
this Prepare the system for future growth – exploit economies of scale It will
be essential for the supply of gas to the west that the 30”  45 km pipeline
Kutumbopur – Meghnaghat and the 30”  140 km Langolbad – Gopalgonj pipelines are
constructed We recommend  higher capacity of the pipelines (36”) to accommodate
future growth in gas demand We would also recommend connecting Gopalgonj and
Khulna to complete the first step of the transmission backbone also creating
system loop The connection would serve as an important part of the major
transmission backbone of the country and facilitate further expansions and
connections of power plants Without these investments, the ELENGA compressor
must be turned on to supply the west of the country with 500 MMCFD 152 of 244
Looking at demand post 2021, it quickly becomes evident that the pipelines
suggested by GTCL are undersized to carry the volume further in the system Thus,
at this stage, we recommend installing larger dimensions pipelines to
accommodate with future demand Of course, for pipelines where materials have
already been purchased or even installed this might prove to be  challenge In
these cases, we suggest carrying on as is Short term gas transmission network
development – 2021 Based on the pipeline studio modelling combined with the need
for gas transmission in the long term, The Consultants’ recommendations for the
short-term network development will be the following pipelines and compressor
stations in addition to the projects already under construction Table 28: Gas
transmission projects – short term up to 2021 Type Length Diameter Diameter
CAPEX Finished GTCL Ramboll Cost km Inch inch USD Million  Moheshkhali-Anowara
Parallel 79 42 42 140 2018  Kutumbopur-Meghnaghat Parallel 45 30 36 175 2021
Bangobandhu (Railway) Parallel 10 36 20 2021 Bridge Section  Langolbad-Maowa 45
30 36 60 2021  Gopalgonj to Khulna New 90 30 42 200 2021 East-West  Bogra-
Rangpur-Nilphamari Parallel 160 24 30 2021 100  Moheshkhali – Dhaka Region 320
48 48 2021 480  India- Khulna New 70 36 36 2021 150 Various smaller pipelines
for New and 150 30 2017- 180 connection of power plants parallel 2021 @ 30 km
Compressor 2021 50 Meter station India 2021 30 SCADA 40 Total 1625 Source: GTCL,
Ramboll MEDIUM TERM (2031) TRANSMISSION SYSTEM MODELLING – SURGE IN DEMAND
REQUIRES COMPLETION OF THE MAJOR TRANSMISSION SYSTEM BACKBONE The medium term
(2031) has been modelled building upon the infrastructure included in the short
term and the connection to India at Khulna In between 2021 and 2031, we project
an 153 of 244 increase in demand from approximately 4500 MMCFD to just above
6500 MMCFD On the domestic supply side, we would expect that some & results have
been achieved between 2021 and 2031 increasing the domestic production from 3000
MMCFD to 4800 MMCFD These are uncertain figures and do of course rely on
following the recommendations on the & The import capacity has been set to allow
up to 500 MMCFD from India (connection at Khulna) From the south east, we allow
up to 2000 MMCFD We do, however, on purpose not specify the source of the
volumes from the south east as these can be achieved from either additional LNG,
from Myanmar or from offshore domestic production Time will show how these
sources develop in feasibility and we find that keeping the flexibility to
adjust is important and prudent Large scale transmission capacity from
Moheshkhali onshore and offshore required to facilitate import Regardless of the
source of the gas volumes from the south east, we find that in order to meet the
gas demand in the Titas, Pashchimanchal and Sundarban regions, the following
projects must be completed: Offshore Pipeline between Moheshkhali and the
“Langolbad – Gopalgonj/Khulna pipeline” We recommend  36”  150 km offshore
pipeline and  42”  150 onshore between Moheshkhali and the Langolbad –
Gopalgonj/Khulna pipeline The actual routing of the pipeline will have to be
adjusted to connection points to power plants and other large consumers as well
to right-of-way and environmental constraints The connection will apart from
evacuating the gas form south east at Moheshkhali, strengthen security of supply
not only in the western part of the country but in fact help the entire country
as dependence on the narrow onshore corridor is reduced To facilitate the
transport further in the system, it is necessary that the diameter of the
connecting Langolbad – Gopalgonj/Khulna pipeline is 36” Figure 84: Medium term
additional investments 154 of 244 Hatikumrul - Langolbad – Gopalgonj/Khulna
pipelines As part of the backbone from south east to north west, we recommend
that the offshore pipeline is continued (36”  120 km) further to Hatikumrul in
the north-western part of the country The routing should preferably follow the
existing transmission system Finally, one intermediate compressor station is
potentially required between Moheshkhali and Dhaka  detailed study is required
to definitively determine this Medium term gas transmission network development
The investments in the medium term will depend on the actual development of the
indigenous gas production However, in all cases, we foresee the need to
strengthen the gas supply from the LNG import facilities and/or Myanmar, which
is the nearest country with surplus gas production Based on the pipeline studio
modelling combined with the view of long term use of the gas transmission, the
following investments are proposed The actual of implementation will need to be
adjusted as the market develops Also, we have an underground gas storage in the
period in order to allow for market integration and system balance which can
facilitate import of gas but also ensure security of gas supply, better
utilisation of LNG terminals and possible transit of gas from Myanmar to India
Table 29: Transmission projects in the medium term to 2031 Type Length Diameter
Diameter Cost Finished GTCL Ramboll  Myanmar Inter 36 2022  Moheshkhali – West
150 36 2026 300 Bangladesh offshore pipeline  Maheshkhali – West 150* 42 250
2026 Bangladesh onshore pipeline  Hatikumrul - [Langolbad – 120 36 180 2026
Gopalgonj/Khulna pipelines]  Compressor 50 2026  Underground gas storage 200
2026- 2028 2022- Various smaller pipelines for New and 150 30 180 2031
connection of power plants parallel @ 30 km 960 Total investment from 2022 to
2031 * Could be longer depending on landfall and chosen connection to the
transmission grid 155 of 244 LONG TERM (2041) TRANSMISSION SYSTEM MODELLING –
UNCERTAINTY AHEAD FOCUS ON FLEXIBILITY AND KEEPING OPTIONS OPEN The situation in
2041 has so much uncertainty about the actual gas production, import via LNG and
pipelines, as well as the actual location of gas consumption Therefore, the GSMP
Consultant has decided not to further attempt to get the model to converge for
this year but instead envisions the design of  flexible system, which will be
able to adapt to most of the uncertainty by creating  strong backbone of the gas
transmission system from the LNG import terminals, south of Dhaka and further to
the Western part of the country As the import of gas supply increases, the
indigenous gas production will increasingly be used close to the gas production
or cease to exist in This situation may result in an operation where the
pressure in the system close to production can be somewhat lowered and perhaps
even the flows reversed Further to the gas transportation,  system with large
diameter pipelines will also be able to provide additional line pack flexibility
to ensure gas demand variations during the day To further increase flexibility
and as back up for LNG supply in case of severe weather conditions, the
Consultants also recommend converting an existing gas field to underground gas
storage Figure 85: High level Long Term Gas Transmission Plan5 Source: Ramboll
Post 2031, the GSMP Consultant estimates that there could be possibilities to
get Turkmen/Iranian gas if the TAPI pipeline is constructed Thus, an additional
connection to India at Rngpur in the north is envisaged The connection should
also enable bidirectional flow allowing potential excess production from Myanmar
to transit through Bangladesh to India The length of  The map shows the general
envisioned back bone required for the long-term plan of the network Exact sizes
and routings should be studied further in feasibility studies but it is
recommended at least one 42” pipeline connects the south east to the north west
of the country and as large as possible pipelines should be implemented 156 of
244 the backbone from the Myanmar to the Indian border is approx 500 km It is
recommended to develop this as  large diameter pipeline, even if such diameter
is only required in the longer term to avoid investing in small diameter
pipelines In general, the system in Bangladesh has so short pipelines that
intermediate compression is only necessary in few cases to ensure sufficient
flow  One intermediate compressor station between Moheshkhali and Dhaka –
location suggested at Feni  Compressor station could be combined with offshore
underground gas storage Sangu field – the feasibility of this should of course
be investigated before any decision, to date we are not aware of any relevant
studies  Border station Myanmar  Border station India (Khulna)  Gas field
compression – in particular when fields are being depleted In addition to line
compressor stations, there maybe  need for field compressor stations when the
production pressure becomes lower than the needed pipeline pressure By using
increased volumes close to the gas fields, it may be possible to lower the
operational pressure of the pipelines closed to production Long term gas
transmission investments The long-term investments from 2032 to 2041 are
difficult to break down into actual projects However, some of the investments
will include at least one large diameter pipeline extra from the LNG import
point to Dhaka and further to the west as shown in Figure  Table 30: Long term
pipeline investments Type Length Diameter Diameter Cost Finished GTCL Ramboll
Moheshkhali – Dhaka Region 250 56 560 2034  Dhaka region – Rangpur* 300 48 580
2036  India (Rangpur) 400 30 480 2032 to  Various smaller pipelines to power
plants – 10 @40 km 2041  Compressor 2036 50  New SCADA 50 950 1720 Total
investment from 2032 to 2041 * Subject to further evaluation Gas could
potentially be transferred by existing infrastructure The actual routing of the
large diameter pipeline will have to be adjusted to connection points to power
plants and other large consumers as well as to right-of-way and environmental
constraints 157 of 244  REGIONAL GAS NETWORK  The regional Euroasian gas network
and supply possibilities The Bangladesh gas system is at present isolated from
other countries As gas networks in Asia are being developed, it will be possible
to integrate the Bangladesh gas network to neighbouring countries and hereby
also to supply from countries with large gas reserves Most obvious will be the
integration with India and Myanmar However, if such integration shall make
sense, it is also important to view how these two countries are connected to the
rest of Asia In recent years,  number of major decisions on development on
creation of an Euroasian gas market have been made, of which the more important
are Myanmar-China pipeline, Myanmar- Thailand pipeline, Turkmenistan- China
pipelines and Russia-China pipelines With the demand developments in Bangladesh,
it would be obvious to connect Bangladesh with the gas transmission systems of
the neighbouring countries Figure 86: Pipeline infrastructure in the region The
next big step in this development may be the TAPI pipeline between Turkmenistan
and India via Afghanistan and Pakistan Iran-India is another possibility, either
via Pakistan or via Oman and an offshore pipeline between Oman and India So far,
the pipelines between Turkmenistan and Iran to India have been hold back due to
lack of market in India With  renewed increase in gas consumption in India and
possible connection between India and Bangladesh there could be sufficient
market for development of the pipelines For Iran, which so far does not have any
LNG facilities, the South Asian market is interesting as gas prices have fallen
so much that development of greenfield LNG facilities for the time being are
hardly economically viable Also for Turkmenistan, which the South Asian market
is an 158 of 244 attractive alternative to the EU market (via Iran and Turkey)
or China (via Kyrgistan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan) is an attractive solution,
with ensured long term demand Russia and India have recently announced the study
for  Russia to India pipeline, either directly via Himalaya or via Iran and
Pakistan  Tapi (international gas transmission pipeline) The
Turkmenistan–Afghanistan–Pakistan–India pipeline will transport Caspian Sea
natural gas from Turkmenistan through Afghanistan into Pakistan and then to
India The total length of the TAPI pipeline will be ,814 kms  214-km section of
the pipeline will run through Turkmenistan,  774-kilometer section will run
through Afghanistan and an 826-kilometer section will run through Pakistan The
pipeline will be 56 inch diameter with  working pressure of 10,000 kPa The
capacity will be 33 billion cubic metres per year of which  billion cubic metres
will be provided to Afghanistan and 14 billion cubic metres each to Pakistan and
India Six compressor stations would be constructed along the pipeline The
pipeline is expected to be operational by  India – Bangladesh – Myanmar gas
pipeline (mbi pipeline) This pipeline project has been conceived under the
Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 for North-eastern region and is planned to connect
Chittagong, Bangladesh then Sitwe, Myanmar with north-eastern states  lot of gas
is burned in the north-east as it cannot be supplied due to lack of
infrastructure As part of Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 for North-eastern region, ,900
km pipelines would be laid connecting Sitwe (Myanmar), Chittagong (Bangladesh),
most north-eastern states, Siliguri and Durgapur Thirteen routes with  total
length of about ,900 km of pipelines have been proposed for the purpose  Russia
– India gas transmission business & plans India and Russia have agreed to
explore building natural gas from Siberia to India The project envisions
connecting the Russian gas grid to India through  ,500-,000km pipeline The
natural gas produced in East Siberian fields is to be pumped into Russian gas
grid, which would be connected to India through the cross-country pipeline
network The shortest route will entail bringing the pipeline through Himalayas
into northern India,  route which poses several technical challenges
Alternately, the pipeline can come via Central Asian nations, Iran and Pakistan
and into Western India However, the route will be expensive when compared to the
long discussed but shorter and cheaper Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline Tehran may
suggest India take its gas through IPI rather than building such an expensive
pipeline  Sage pipeline Based on the discovery of Farsi Block gas field in Iran
by OVL, India has already planned to transport the produced gas through pipeline
or by means of LNG Hence, India developed  master plan in early 2008 to
transport the produced natural gas from Iran to India through subsea pipeline
across the Arabian Sea & revalidated the same in This plan has been given to
SAGE (South Asia Gas Enterprise Pvt Ltd) to develop further 159 of 244 SAGE is
promoted by the New Delhi based Siddho Mal Group, in Joint Venture with  UK-
based Deepwater Technology Company SAGE Pipeline Infrastructure plans to
transport  TCF of Natural Gas over the next 20 years from the Gulf Region to the
coast of India using the Deep-sea route The pipeline passing through the Arabian
Sea will reach depths of ,400 metres under the sea and will have  length of
approximately ,300 kms Qatar, Iran, Iraq and Turkmenistan together have enormous
Natural Gas reserves to the tune of ,000 TCF and SAGE plans to transport some of
this to India through its Deepwater Pipeline Infrastructure The option of Gas
Swaps between these nations is also being explored  Jagdishpur-Haldia gas
transmission pipeline (Gail) Jagdishpur-Haldia Pipeline (JHPL) is an extension
of gas transmission pipeline from Jagdishpur, Uttar Pradesh to Haldia, Kolkata
This pipeline connects the eastern part of the country with the national gas
grid JHPL will feed natural gas to industrial, commercial, domestic and
transport sectors in West Bengal The other phase of the JHPL will also connect
Patna, Bihar MoPNG has also proposed future extension of JHPL which would feed
far North-eastern part (Guwahati, Assam) of India The JHPL is said to be 2620
Kms long and it will be constructed in different phases to connect Gaya, Patna
and Haldia The JHPL is laid with different size of pipes based on its
requirement and it is expected to handle 16 MMSCMD of gas flow As of now, 90 Km
of pipeline has been laid and it is anticipated to be commissioned in 2019 -
Figure 87: Ongoing JHPL (Red Route) & Future Pipeline Extension to Assam (Blue
Route)  Feasibility for gas transmission hook-up to Bangladesh from India Due to
increase in demand for natural gas in Asian countries like Afghanistan,
Pakistan, India & Bangladesh, several Gas Transmission Pipelines have been
proposed with mutual agreements and discussions to import natural gas from Gulf
countries Based on the recent pipeline project, 160 of 244 development &
extension of the gas transmission grid which connects Haldia & Guwahati eastern
region of India marks the possibility of hook-up connection to Bangladesh The
JHPL network which terminates at Haldia is forecasted to have Gas Boosting
Station and considered to be hub for gas distributing city Haldia is located
approx 125 kms southwest of Kolkata This JHPL network is under construction
which connects Gaya in between From Gaya, it runs to connect Patna & Barauni,
Bihar as well  750-km proposed natural gas pipeline will link the Northeast with
the national grid to meet increasing fuel needs of households and factories in
the region The proposed pipeline will have  capacity of 15 MMSCMD and will
source gas at Barauni from Jagdishpur-Haldia pipeline being built by GAIL to
connect Guwahati, Assam OPTION- For the transport of natural gas from India to
Bangladesh, the feasible hook-up location will be Haldia, Kolkata as Jagdishpur-
Haldia Pipeline is an ongoing project and from Haldia the natural gas can be
transported to South-West part of Bangladesh  pipeline of approx 135 kms can be
connected to Boalia, Satkhira, Bangladesh from Haldia, Kolkata This hook-up
connection can supply gas to the southern region of Bangladesh OPTION- For the
transport of natural gas from India to Bangladesh, the feasible hook-up location
will be Kishanganj, Bihar  pipeline of approx 120 kms can be connected to
Dinajpur, Bangladesh from Kishanganj, Bihar which shall see few river crossings
as well This hook-up connection can supply gas to the northern region of
Bangladesh It is to be noted that the blue route pipeline in the below figure is
still under proposal stage by India Figure 88: Feasibility Options for Hook-up
The provided options above for the gas transmission pipeline which connects
Dianjpur from Kishanganj and Ishwaripur from Haldia will see an important
advantage as these cities will be nearby locations to planned Gas Transmission
Grid in Bangladesh 161 of 244  Myanmar gas network and supply situation
Reserves, production and consumption Myanmar gas reserves have increased rapidly
in recent years as the political development has attracted renewed interest in
the sector In 2016, the reserves according to BP more than doubled to 42 tcf
from 2015 to The gas reserves in Myanmar are consequently more than six times
the Bangladesh gas reserves and of the same size as the Indian gas reserves Gas
production in Myanmar has increased rapidly in recent years and is now
bcf/year, while consumption is limited Consequently, most of the gas was
exported to China and Thailand, respectively Myanmar has the highest / ratio in
South and South-East Asia  Gas transmission infrastructure Myanmar The gas
transmission system in Myanmar is based on export of gas to Thailand and China,
respectively The Myanmar-China gas pipeline connects the offshore gas fields of
Myanmar to China The pipeline was commissioned in 2013 and production and export
have slowly increased The Myanmar-Thailand pipeline connects the Total operated
gas fields in Myanmar with Thailand via off- and onshore gas pipelines  Myanmar-
Bangladesh trade options For the GSMP2016 the import of gas from Myanmar was not
considered Instead, the Myanmar gas reserves were developed for export to China
and continuous export to Thailand India has been developing plans for import of
gas from Myanmar to India, with  possibility of crossing Bangladesh From
technical point of view, the development of gas trade between Myanmar and
Bangladesh can take place by installing  short pipeline of around 300 km from
the landfall of the Myanmar offshore gas fields to the planned LNG import
terminals in Bangladesh, and hereby using the same infrastructure from this
location to Chittagong and further to Dhaka This route can also constitute  part
of  future route to India As long as there are new discoveries and developments
in Myanmar, it may be possible to purchase such spare gas  Recommendations for
integration in “Bay of Bengal” gas market Based on the development in India, it
is recommended to initially evaluate the possibilities for interconnection of
India and Bangladesh already in the short run to share the LNG developments 162
of 244 and need for back-up facilities This will only require  relatively short
pipeline of less than 200 km  connection between Myanmar and Bangladesh will
make Bangladesh an important bridge between South and South-East Asian gas
markets Figure 89: Myanmar – Bangladesh – India pipeline connection possibility
On the longer term, Bangladesh can become part of an integrated Euroasian gas
market with indirect connections and agreements to Russia, Iran and Turkmenistan
By connecting Bangladesh to Myanmar and India it is possible to create  “Bay of
Bengal” gas transmission system and consequently also  gas market 163 of 244
Figure 90: Possible “Bay of Bengal” integrated gas transmission system in
Euroasia market By integrating the gas transmission systems in Bangladesh with
India and Myanmar, it will be possible to share the LNG import facilities in
India and Bangladesh and hereby improve technical security of gas supply This is
in particular important as severe weather conditions in the Bay of Bengal can
close more terminals in Bangladesh at the same time In the short term, it will
be possible to increase the utilisation of the Indian LNG import terminals,
which is presently only around 50 % Myanmar can benefit by having both
Bangladesh and India as new markets for gas in addition to Thailand and China
This may make it easier to attract international oil and gas companies for
exploration and development The Consultants strongly recommends accelerating the
work on integration between the three countries This can initially be done by
creating  forum with participants from the three countries 164 of 244  LNG
IMPORT LNG supply availability is of paramount importance to the continuity of
gas supply in Bangladesh, since indigenous production is declining and there is
no short-term production to offset the demand-supply gap As of January 2017, the
total nominal capacity of global liquefaction plants is 340 MTPA Liquefaction
capacity additions are poised to increase over the next few years as MTPA of
capacity was under-construction as of January Furthermore, given the abundant
gas discoveries globally and the shale revolution in the US, it can be expected
that this figure will grow significantly in the years to come According to the
World IGU Report, this figure is around 879 MTPA Global Regasification capacity
increased nearly 800 MTPA by the beginning of 2017, mainly supported by
additional capacity coming online in established markets such as China, Japan,
France, India, Turkey, and South Korea With respect to LNG trade World, IGU
report for 2017 informs that for the third () consecutive years, global LNG
trade set  new record reaching 258 MT This marks an increase of MT (+%) from The
growth rate in 2016 was  noticeable increase from the average growth of % over
the last four years The continued addition of supply in the Pacific Basin,
primarily in Australia, as well as the start of exports from the United States
Gulf of Mexico (US GOM) enabled this increase As there are sufficient worldwide
LNG resources to supply Bangladesh' gas import requirements, the import of LNG
seems to be favourable  Locations for all LNG Import facilities As described
previously, gas supply and demand balance forecast revealed the tremendous
shortage of the natural gas supply Therefore, the introduction of LNG would be
the practical option in order to compensate the huge gap between the demand and
supply The LNG receiving facilities must be constructed in Bangladesh The
constructions of proven onshore facilities require  great amount of cost and
time While contrary, the offshore gas receiving facility has developed and does
not require that much expenses and time The purpose of this section is to review
the key elements that will allow securing the stable natural gas supply to bulk
users such as power stations and fertilisers in the future Several key
challenges are anticipated from the technical perspective in order to achieve an
economic and energy effective LNG terminal  Overview of LNG Terminal Development
Plans Bangladesh will need to install sufficient LNG receiving and distribution
facilities to support domestic gas demand requirements Minimum commitments to
purchase LNG will be necessary at levels to support the long-term financing,
construction and operations of these faculties 165 of 244 Based on the analysis
done in Chapter , Bangladesh will need to procure significant amounts of natural
gas until And the latter objective is aimed to be achieved with the following
projects listed in the table below, provided by RPGCL: Table 31: Proposed LNG
terminals Bangladesh Terminal Operator Operator Country Flow Rate (mmcfd)
Commissioning Schedule Project Type SL No Type Location Status Moheshkhali (
91°49ꞌ07",  21°32ꞌ04")  FSRU Excelerate USA 500 Apr‐18 BOOT TUA and IA signed
Moheshkhali ( 91°48ꞌ24",  21°33ꞌ4")  FSRU Summit Bangladesh 500 Oct‐18 BOOT TUA
and IA signed Moheshkhali ( 91°50ꞌ951",  21°32ꞌ5279") MoU signed and Contract
signed for feasibility study ( 91°50ꞌ4139",  21°33ꞌ1941") Land Based Terminal
HQC China 1000 Dec‐21 BOOT ( 91°51ꞌ3688",  21°33ꞌ420") ( 91°51ꞌ593",
21°32ꞌ3744") Kutubdia ( 91°47ꞌ00",  21°44ꞌ00") Term Sheet Agreement signed  FSU
HSMPL Bangladesh 500 Mar‐20 BOOT Kutubdia ( 91°50ꞌ335272",  21°51ꞌ482339") (
91°50ꞌ505040",  21°51ꞌ518732") Land Based Terminal Petronet India  1000 Dec‐21
BOOT HoU signed ( 91°50ꞌ413246",  21°51ꞌ165397") ( 91°50ꞌ583004",  21°32ꞌ5279")
Kutubdia ( 91°49ꞌ18145",  21°51ꞌ34463") 500 May‐19 BOOT TUA intialed FSRU
Reliance India  Land Based Terminal FSRU (Energy Hub) Moheshkhali (Coordinate
not finalised)  Sembcorp Singapore 1000 Dec‐22 BOOT MoU signed Beximco and TUMAS
Bashkali (Coordinate not finalised) Malta  600‐1000 ‐ BOOT MoU signed KAFCO
Jetty, Chittagong  Small Scale Gunvor Singapore 200 Jul‐18 BOO GSA initialed 10
Small Scale Trafigura Singapore 200 Jul‐18 BOO GSA initialed CUFL Jetty,
Chittagong Negotiation going on 11 Small Scale Vitol Singapore 200 Aug‐18 BOO
SANGU, Chittagong Table 32: Upcoming Near Future Large Scale LNG Import Projects
Project Location Capacity Leading Operating Status Project (mmscfd) Agency
Entity and/or Operation operation 166 of 244 FSRU Moheshkhali 500 Petrobangla
Excelerate April 2018 BOOT Energy Bangladesh FSRU Moheshkhali 500 Petrobangla
Summit October 2018 BOOT LNG Source: Ramboll Both projects will be constructed
in the south of Bangladesh as shown below and indicated by the grey spot The
proposed sites are situated at the south-eastern region of Bangladesh within the
Upazilla Moheskhali under the district of Cox’ Bazar and spread along the Bay of
Bengal Figure 91: Geographical positioning of the upcoming LNG import projects
Source: Ramboll Comparing with the present & future gas consumers of the entire
country, the LNG infrastructure development proposals are mainly centred in the
Chittagong and Cox’ Bazar (South-East regions of the country) areas This will
require significant investments in pipelines to transport natural gas through
pipelines to the Western regions of the country Therefore, RPGCL opines that in
addition to the projects at Chittagong and Cox’ Bazar areas, Mongla Port and
Paira Port areas (proposed) may be considered as LNG terminal development
locations, directly feeding natural gas into the gas grids for the Western
regions of the country; this will ensure energy security also RPGCL is working
along with the Government policy and has keen interest for the success of the
Government through proper implementation of the SDG action plans (Mid-Term and
Long- Term development plans) up to 2030 and Vision – 2041 as well The
Consultants support this approach as one of the steps in optimising LNG import
configurations At the same time, we encourage relevant stakeholders to have
sufficient data 167 of 244 available,  site selection study, bathymetric and
metocean data, feasibility study to justify these new locations  thorough cost-
benefit analysis should also be carried out against alternative options, before
committing to any significant investments  Update of FSRU terminal planning in
Bangladesh The FSRU will be located offshore near Moheshkhali Island in the Bay
of Bengal The terminal will serve as  hub to provide the crucial infrastructure
required for the country to access natural gas from global markets Moheshkhali
Floating LNG will be  fully integrated turnkey floating LNG terminal with
Excelerate Energy to develop, design, construct, install, finance, and operate
the terminal Excelerate Energy will operate the terminal for the first 15 years,
after which the company will transfer ownership to Petrobangla The FSRU will
have 138,000 cubic metres of LNG storage capacity and  base regasification
capacity of 500 million standard cubic feet per day (mmscfd) with the
possibility of expansion to 600 mmscfd The terminal is expected to be in
operation in Figure 92: Floating Storage and Regasification Unit illustration
Source: Excelerate Energy Another FSRU project has been signed and confirmed
between the Summit Group and Petrobangla  company of Summit group will install
Floating Storage and Re-gasification Unit (FSRU) at Moheshkhali Island in the
Cox' Bazar The state-owned Petrobangla signed on 20th of April 2017  deal with
Summit Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Terminal Company in this connection The
Summit will set up the floating storage and FSRU terminal, which is expected to
go into operation after 18 months in October The floating terminal will supply
500 million cubic feet of natural gas per day The contractual agreement will be
on Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT) basis Summit will transfer the facilities
to Petrobangla after operating it for 15 years Summit will implement the project
jointly with US- 168 of 244 based GE (20%) as equity investment partner On
completion of the project, the gas supplied by the FSRU can potentially supply
to existing oil-run power plants like Meghnaghat and possibly reduce power
generation cost by less than half Figure 93: Floating Storage and Regasification
Unit illustration Both projects proposed are based on the installation of an
FSRU Generally, the rapid growth of the FSRU market is mainly due to the lower
cost, faster schedule, commercial flexibility and reusable asset feature of
FSRUs when compared to land based (onshore) terminals which cannot be relocated
and must be regarded as  sunk cost The following table provides pros and cons of
FSRU over onshore LNG receiving terminal    169 of 244 Table 33: Pros and cons
of FSRU Pros Cons  Since the initial investment cost  Charter fee including
operation and (CAPEX) is low and construction maintenance (OPEX) is high In
period is rather short, it is beneficial general, the total cost of FSRU for to
use the FSRU for the urgent or more than 10 years of operation tends temporary
requirements to be higher than the total cost (CAPEX+OPEX) of an onshore
terminal In terms of relocation the terminal can  There are constraints in the
expansion  be moved for another use when no of LNG storage facilities and
longer needed (lower demand than equipment expected) Also, easiness of 
Operational stability is affected by dismantling meteorological and
oceanographic conditions  There are fewer environmental constraints compared to
the onshore terminal Source: JICA Southern Chittagong Survey Team  Economic
Comparison between FSRU and Land-based LNG Receiving Terminal The main purpose
of this section is to compare and provide key aspects of the two different LNG
Import infrastructures, FSRU and Land based LNG terminal It is essential to note
that each method has its own features and advantages FSRUs are based on LNG
tankers and use essentially the same technology as onshore terminals The only
real difference is that the equipment is engineered to be suitable for shipyard
construction and marine operation For  new build vessel the equipment is
normally integrated into the vessel For  conversion the equipment is normally
built as  separate module or modules and retrofitted to the LNG vessel in
shipyard to minimise time LNG loading to FSRU will be carried out by STS (ship
to ship transfer) In order to supply 500MMCFD of gas, more than 60 shipments
will be required in  year The construction of FSRU is almost the same as that of
LNG tanker Old LNG tankers can be remodelled as FSRU to save construction cost
Operation of FSRU is in general vulnerable to weather condition, and emergency
evacuations plan must be in place if it is operating in the cyclone prone area
Land based LNG Terminal on the other hand requires  larger onshore footprint to
minimise investment to the infrastructure and also to secure freedom to
construct additional tanks to meet the incremental demand The space required for
such  land based LNG regasification plant is considered conservative Initial
tank numbers are assumed to be two and to be expanded with the increase of
demand Many of the original FSRUs were based on Moss or Membrane LNG tanker
conversions The recent trend has been to construct new build vessels with
typically around 170,000 m3 geometric storage 170 of 244 and   mmscfd send out
rate However, it is interesting to note that Höegh LNG has just placed an order
with Maritime (engineering) and Wärtsila Oil and Gas for the conversion of an
existing Moss tanker It appears that the order is for the engineering and
procurement of the long delivery equipment items only, to enable physical
conversion work to be completed in just 12 months, rather than the normal 18
months if the equipment had to be ordered Both of these conversion options are
less than the  months required to construct  new vessel As earlier mentioned,
the operation of FSRU is vulnerable to weather condition The bay of Bengal is
known as Cyclone Frequency of Cyclone landing at Moheshkhali area is not high in
comparison with other areas, but influences every year The scale of Cyclone is
reported to be increasingly larger than before Thus, this is another fact which
supports the idea of taking extra precautions, such as emergency evacuations
plans etc Figure 94: Cyclone in Bay of Bengal Source: Nippon Koei Research
Institute Concerning the operation expenditure (OPEX) and capital expenditure,
the following table summarises the key differences between FSRU and Land-based
LNG Terminal 171 of 244 Table 34: CAPEX comparison between FSRU and Land-based
LNG Terminal Source: OIES Paper: NG 123 (The Oxford Institute for Energy
Studies) Table 35: Operation Cost Comparison between FSRU and Land-based LNG
Terminal FSRU Land LNG Land LNG (See Note ) (See Note ) (See Note ) Initial
tanks Expanded to 14 tanks Tank M3 138,000 *180,000 14*180,000 Capacity Annual
LNG Times/Year 59 40 186 Delivery Re- Mmscfd 500 500 ,000 Gasification Capacity
Construction MM USD 760 ,260 Cost Operation USD/Mcf 49 64 (See Note ) 33 (See
Note ) Cost Source: JICA Survey Team Notes: : Data from Bangladesh Energy and
Power News : Land Acquisition Cost for Terminal assumed USD 200 million : Tax
Rate 20% and IRR 10% assumed, Including Port Operation Cost In terms of the
construction time, the majority of construction work of FSRU is carried out at
shipyard and amount of on-site construction work is relatively small Project
schedule from Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) to the commencement of
operation is short and takes less than  years as depicted in the table below 172
of 244 Table 36: Time Schedule for Large Scale FSRU Construction Source: JICA
Survey Team, Ramboll The project schedule for Land-based LNG terminal is longer
than that of FSRU Significant time and effort must be taken into account as
illustrated in the following table This includes EIA agreement with the local
people and re-settlement plan associated with land acquisition Large scale land
preparation work and infrastructure construction such as breakwater will be
carried out if necessary Construction of tank foundation to avoid uneven
settlement is also time-consuming work 173 of 244 Table 37: Time Schedule for
Land-based LNG Terminal Construction Source: JICA Survey Team, Ramboll 174 of
244 LEGAL AND REGULATORY Objective The objective of the legal and regulatory
analysis is to discuss the policy and institutional reforms necessary for
sustainable development of the sector and provide  path for implementation of
these reforms The link between such reforms and reduction in cost of supply will
be investigated to ensure that investment is directed towards the efficient
development of least cost options Assessment of the policy framework includes
discussion of the ability of government to spur the development of least-cost
solutions Review of legal and regulatory documents The Consultants have reviewed
key legal and regulatory documents for the gas sector, in particular:  Gas Act
of 19 July 2010  Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission (BERC) Act of 2003,
Amendment 17 February2005, 24 February 2010  Bangladesh Energy Regulatory
Commission License Regulations, Amendment  September 2006  Bangladesh Energy
Regulatory Commission, Notification on Gas Tariff Methodology, 29 December 2010,
Published 13 January 2011  Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission, Public
Notice on Gas Tariffs, 23 February 2017 Petroleum Act of 1974, Amendment 26 July
2016  The Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Mineral Corporation Ordinance from 1985
(Petrobangla)  Petrobangla Annual Reports 2013, 2014, 2015   Gas utilisation
Guidelines, Petrobangla, 2013 Tariff reforms and intersectoral allocation of
natural gas, ADB   Other relevant reports The review forms the basis for the
following chapters where the regulatory environment is described 175 of 244 Key
entities in the oil and gas sector and institutional set-up  Existing
institutional setup Figure 95: Existing institutional setup Source: PetroBangla
& Ramboll  The role of Petrobangla The single-buyer model applies in Bangladesh
through  complex system of administered internal transfer prices Petrobangla
acquires gas from IOCs at PSC contract prices, mixes it with its own gas from
subsidiaries, then transmits the gas and distributes it to its customers
Ultimately, Petrobangla is allocating gas to consumers and administering
bundled gas price set by the BERC Petrobangla also has  role as the upstream
regulator, supervising and monitoring the PSCs at the same time it is the
counterpart to the contracts It is also self-regulating its own operations,
including its subsidiaries 176 of 244 Petrobangla Annual Report for the year
ending 30 June 2015 included  Statement of Profit or Loss, that showed an
operating loss of BDT ,272,296,773 (USD million), net surplus of BDT 461,364,554
(USD  million) and  deficit on the Appropriation account of BDT 30,547,281,756
(USD million) mainly from deficits brought forward from previous years
Financial flows in the gas sector The flow of gas and money in the Bangladesh
gas sector is shown in Figure Starting from the top of the figure, there are gas
productions from IOCs and the Petrobangla subsidiaries  BAPEX, BGFCL and SGFL
The IOC gas production under Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) is split in
“Cost Gas” (cost recovery of the investment and operational expenses) and
“Profit Gas” (revenues in excess of cost) Figure 96: Flow of gas and money in
the gas sector in Bangladesh Flow of Gas Flow of Cash Petrobangla Gas from IOCs
Gas from BAPEX/BGFCL/SGFL Pay IOCs Cost Gas Cash from Sales IOC Cost Gas
Transmission Company GTCL (Margin) Pay IOCs Profit Gas IOC Profit Gas Profit Gas
free to Bangladeshi gas companies PB Profit Gas Cash from Sales Distribution
Companies Profit Gas (Free) Profit Gas free to Bangladeshi gas companies
Distribution Companies (Margin) Cash from Sales Cash from Sales Currently
Petrobangla purchases all Cost Gas and Profit Gas from the IOCs Payment by
Private and Industrial Consumers Payment by Private and Industrial Consumers
Source: Ramboll, ADB The Profit Gas which Petrobangla receives is free of charge
and is provided for free to its subsidiaries, called “Distribution companies” in
Figure The IOCs could in principle sell their profit gas to the highest bidder;
however, in practice Petrobangla exercises its “right of first refusal” to
purchase cost and profit gas and provide it to its subsidiaries 177 of 244 The
gas produced by Petrobangla subsidiaries BGFCL, SGFL and BAPEX is sold at gas
tariff set by BERC, which include the transmission charges to GTCL and
distribution charges The Distribution companies sell gas to consumers at gas
tariffs set by BERC As can be seen from Figure 96, the subsidiaries collect the
revenue from the sale of gas and receive  margin to cover their expenditures
This structure results in  profit for all subsidiaries, while Petrobangla’
consolidated account shows  loss, mainly due to the low-end user prices
Petrobangla subsidiaries Aside from exploring oil and gas and drilling, BAPEX is
producing nearly 130 mmcfd BAPEX made  post-tax net profit of BDT million in FY
2014-BAPEX has formulated  time-bound action plan with  view to accelerating the
exploration of oil and gas and augmenting production by Bangladesh Gas Fields
Company Limited (BGFCL) is the largest state-owned natural gas production
company in Bangladesh It is  public limited company registered under Companies
Act and contributes about 35% of total gas production of the country BGFCL
earned  gross revenue of BDT 32,million and  pre-tax profit of BDT ,million
during the FY 2014- Sylhet Gas Fields Limited (SGFL) is the second largest
state-owned gas company SGFL produced 08 BCF of gas in FY  The gas is supplied
to Jalalabad, Bakhrabad, Pashchimanchal and Karnaphuli gas distribution
companies During FY , the company earned BDT ,million from the sales of gas and
BDT 12,million from the sales of finished liquid products Company earned pre-tax
profit of BDT ,million in FY 2014-Gas Transmission Company Limited (GTCL) was
incorporated in 1993 with the objectives of () centralising operation and
maintenance of the national gas grid; and (ii) expanding the national gas grid
and as required, ensuring balanced supply and usage of natural gas in all
regions of the country Gas transmission pipelines built by other companies
before creation of GTCL have been integrated with the GTCL system It operates
1560 km of gas transmission pipelines, delivering gas to franchise areas of
Jalalabad, Titas, Bakhrabad, Karnaphuli and Paschimancahal gas marketing and
distribution companies respectively GTCL earned an amount of BDT ,million as
revenue and BDT ,million (USD million) as pre-tax profit FY 2014-Titas Gas
Transmission and Distribution Company Limited (TGTDCL) is the largest
transmission and distribution company with  62% share of the Bengali market
serving 12 districts including Dhaka It owns and operates around 450 km high-
pressure transmission pipelines, with lower capacity than those of GTCL
Petrobangla holds 75% shares of this company while private shareholders hold 25%
of the shares The company earned  net profit on operations before tax of BDT
12,million (USD million) in FY  of 244 There are five other distribution
companies, of which Jalalabad Gas Transmission and Distribution System Limited
(JGTDSL) owns and operates transmission pipelines, same case for Karnaphuli Gas
Distribution Company Limited (KGDCL), the youngest company established in
Unaccounted for gas Unaccounted for gas, explained by Petrobangla as System
loss, plus pifferage/system gain was at its maximum bcf in 2005, or % of total
production, which was due to  sudden sharp growth in gas demand and had affected
the pressure factor on gas metering, and fell to % in the second half of 2015
from % in  (after some years in the negative (, system gain) If this figure is
correct and sustainable, Petrobangla has reached  level for Unaccounted for gas
comparable to international best practice The National Transmission System in
the UK estimates Unaccounted for gas for gas transmission to - % of throughput
in recent years Gas tariffs The BERC Act from 2003 gave the Commission the
mandate to regulate downstream gas tariffs The Notification on Gas Tariff
Methodology, 29 December 2010, provides the procedure and methodology to gas
companies to calculate and request gas tariff revisions The methodology
determines how to calculate, how to allocate average and peak costs, the cost of
service for different customer classes and the calculation of Revenue
Requirement for service to each class Rate of Return for distribution licenses
on qualifying assets or rate base is determined based on  calculation of the
weighted average cost of capital To determine the return on equity, the
Commission gives preference to  Capital Asset Pricing Model, but allows other
calculation options BERC sets tariffs for  customer classes and residential
consumption, which can be metered or unmetered These customer classes are
defined in the Gas Act The latest price increases were  March and  June 2017
resulting in current prices shown in Table 38 By international standards these
are low, in particular prices paid by the power stations, which take around 40%
of all gas in Bangladesh, and the prices paid by fertilisers taking around % of
the gas Other large gas consumers, captive power and industry pay around three
times as much as power stations and fertiliser for the gas, but still less than
in most countries 179 of 244 Table 38: Natural Gas Tariff June 2017 BDT/MCF
USD/MCF Power 38 Fertiliser 19 Industry 40 Commercial 46 Tea estate 25 Captive
power 21 CNG 1400 50 Residential Metered 392 90 Unmetered: Monthly Payment per
burner Single burner BDT USD 900 25 Double burner 950 88 Source: BERC: Public
Notice for Gas Tariff, 2017 Note: Converted at BDT 80/USD Figure 97 provides an
international comparison of wholesale gas prices in It shows that Bangladesh'
gas prices are in the lower half compared with other gas markets (around the 40%
benchmark) Since 2014, Bangladesh' gas price has gone up by almost USD /MMbtu,
while gas prices have gone down in many countries due to lower oil prices and
oversupply in the LNG market The exception to low prices in Bangladesh is the
price of CNG Its price is based on the price of the fuels it substitutes
(Gasoline and Diesel): the price of 1400 BDT/Mcf (or USD 39/Mcf) translates into
more than USD 100/barrel of oil 180 of 244 Figure 97: Wholesale gas prices by
country, Source: IGU: Wholesale Gas Price Survey - 2017 Edition The latest gas
price increases were the first since 2015 and before that, Figure 98 shows the
development in gas tariffs in Bangladesh since 2002 for the key customer classes
Price increases for power and fertiliser have been moderate over these years and
the prices are still low based on international comparisons There have been
recent sharp increases in the prices paid by commercial, captive power and
domestic metered gas consumption These three classes of customers account for
almost 30% of total gas demand in Bangladesh, the commercial sector, however,
consumes only  fraction of this (less than %) CNG is not shown in the graph The
price for CNG has more than doubled since 2011 and increased five times since
CNG consumption accounts for around % of total gas demand in the country Also
not shown is the fixed payment for unmetered burners, which has doubled since In
2009 and 2010 BERC rejected price increase applications from Petrobangla, on the
grounds of the profitability of its retail, transmission and wholesale
businesses and in 2016, BERC rejected the proposal of increasing gas prices,
placed by Titas Gas Transmission and Distribution Company Ltd, saying that the
company did not need to increase its distribution charges because the estimated
revenue was above the revenue requirement7  Dhaka Tribune, August , 181 of 244
Figure 98: Gas Tariff for key customer classes,  1600    /     CNG 1400 1200
1000 800 Commercial 600 Domestic Captive Power Industry 400 200 Power Fertiliser
Source: Petrobangla Annual reports, BERC: Public Notice for Gas Tariff, 2017 The
breakdown of the gas prices is shown in Table 39 The end user price is shown in
the left column The key components are  Government tax around 50% of the end
user price, which is high by international standards The other approx 50% are
allocated to Petrobangla companies in the form of margins: Thin margins for
upstream operations: BAPEX and wellhead margin  Transmission and distribution
margins are also very thin  Payments to provide  return on assets  
Contributions to the petroleum development fund and the gas development fund
BERC ordered the gas development fund to be set up when it increased natural gas
tariffs in 2009, with the condition that the additional revenue generated
following the increase would be transferred to the fund The funds are used to
carry out gas exploration and development and to enhance the capacity of the
national exploration and production companies In , 19 investment projects
financed by the gas development fund were under development 182 of 244 Table 39:
Gas price breakdown 2017 tariff (USD/Mcf) End User Price Govt Tax Bapex Margin
Price Deficit Fund Margin Deficit Wellhead Margin for BAPEX Wellhead Margin
Support for shortfall Transm Margin Distrib Margin Gas Dev Fund Energy Security
Fund Sector Power 38 67 14 02 02 10 15 07 12 04 05 Fertilizer 19 62 12 00 02 10
06 07 12 07 02 CNG 91 46 65 05 09 13 17 07 07 37 87 Capt Power Industry 21 00 20
02 02 10 55 07 07 09 09 40 61 33 02 02 10 44 07 11 12 57 Tea Garden 25 54 33 02
02 10 42 07 11 12 48 Commercial 46 72 58 02 02 10 47 07 11 24 09 Domestic 90 67
31 02 02 10 83 07 11 12 65 Source: BERC 2017 Note: Converted from BDT/cm,
assuming 35 cf/cm and BDT 80/USD While the BAPEX and wellhead margin for
upstream operations are thin, funds from the Price Deficit Fund Margin and
Deficit Wellhead Margin for BAPEX more than double the funds available for
upstream activities under Petrobangla (in addition to investments from IOCs) The
transmission and distribution margins are extremely low, around % respectively %
of the average gas price The transmission margin does not provide GTCL
sufficient funding for the expansion of  reliable transmission system to
facilitate transport of new production and imported LNG to consumption areas
GTCL’ reliance on public funding and donor assistance (ADB, JICA and World Bank)
has meant that it has been unable to invest sufficiently to develop transmission
infrastructure In , only two pipeline projects were self-financed by GTCL The
Distribution margin is higher than the transmission margin as gas distribution
of smaller volumes at lower pressure is more costly The Distribution company
margin is vital for  sustainable operation of the low pressure grid delivering
gas to consumers The margin does not support the distribution companies’
capability in investments to expand the network Distribution companies are also
relying on donor assistance for investment projects The gas price breakdown
shows that much larger funds are set aside for shortfall and energy security and
funds set aside to carry out gas exploration and development and for the gas
development fund The margin for transmission and distribution should be
increased, either through  higher gas price, possibly from funds set aside for
other purposes  better solution would be to develop tariffs for transmission and
distribution of gas, providing transmission and distribution companies with
sufficient funds for self-financing of their investment in expansions 183 of 244
Gas allocation and pricing  Gas Utilisation Guidelines8 This Guideline reviews
gas supply and demand balance, projects the future supply and demand balance and
reviews gas fuel efficiency in the main sectors, including for various plants
and equipment It concludes with  sector-based priority for domestic gas
allocation when shortages begin:  Fertiliser  Electricity  Industry/tea garden
Captive power  Residential/commercial  CNG The guidelines also recommend  number
of efficiency measures: To reduce gas to the fertiliser sector by 10%, and to
increase the efficiency of fertiliser  factories using more than 35 Mcf/ton of
fertiliser, and closing the most inefficient plant; To limit the total
allocation of gas to the power sector to 40% of the daily gas supply,  only
provide gas supply to new power plants that have more than 50% fuel efficiency,
and are based on combined cycle technology and duel-fuelled Suspend gas supply
to low efficiency power plants; To reduce gas supply to filling stations, price
increases for CNG, and  To reduce gas supply to low-efficiency captive power
plants  An ADB study estimated the economic value of gas in domestic,
transport, power and fertiliser sectors in 2011 in Bangladesh9 Willingness to
Pay for natural gas used as CNG was concluded to be the highest, which was
followed by gas substituting petroleum products in power generation, gas used to
produce fertiliser and for household cooking Table 40: Actual price of gas,
Marginal Value Product and Willingness to Pay for gas, 2011 Source: TARIFF
REFORMS AND INTERSECTORAL ALLOCATION OF NATURAL GAS, ADB 2013 The study showed
that the current gas allocation and pricing does not reflect economic values of
gas Only % of the value of gas is captured in the power sector when substituting
petroleum products (although oil prices averaged USD 104 per barrel, around the
double of the 2017  Gas utilisation Guidelines, Petrobangla, Tariff reforms and
intersectoral allocation of natural gas, ABD 184 of 244 average until July, the
value captured is still low today), and % substituting coal The bulk of the gas
is allocated for power generation In the fertiliser sector only 12% of the
economic value was captured The highest price was charged for CNG but it was
only 66% of the Willingness to Pay In the household sector the gas price was
only about 36% of the Willingness to Pay for gas Household sector received only
12% of the gas This indicates severe under-pricing and inefficient allocation of
natural gas in Bangladesh If the economic efficiency is strictly followed, more
gas should be allocated to the sectors where the economic value is highest, ,
CNG, replacing petroleum products in the power sector, and in the fertiliser
sector Upstream fiscal terms for the PSCs and Bidding process The 2012 Offshore
bidding round attracted little interest from private investors The reason for
the lukewarm response may include low gas prices and Petrobangla’ right of first
refusal to buy the gas production The lack of access to good geological data was
also  factor reducing contractors’ interest The fiscal terms for the 2012 Round
can be summarised as follows10:  Exploration period: Seven years for onshore
and eight years for offshore blocks  Contract term is 20 years for oil and 25
years for gas after approval of the Development plan  Contractor can dispose
gas freely but Petrobangla has first right of refusal and will pay  discounted
price (-%)  Contractor has obligation to sell gas in the domestic market
Exports are not allowed  Biddable profit share on  sliding scale  Maximum
annual cost recovery: 55% of the revenues  Offshore Gas Prices: Arithmetic
Average Asian Petroleum Price Index for High Sulphur Oil 180 CST FOB with  floor
at USD 100 per tonne (normally  percent below crude oil prices, approx USD
/MMBtu) and ceiling at USD 200 per tonne (approx USD /MMBtu)  Onshore gas
prices are % of the Offshore price  Carried interest of 10% in all shallow
water gas blocks for BAPEX In 2016, Petrobangla changed the strategy away from
bidding rounds towards direct negotiations with interested parties Petrobangla
invited EOIs from interested IOCs for specific offshore blocks Instead of
finalising the model production-sharing contract before launching the bidding
round, the contract terms will be fixed on the basis of the bids received, with
following negotiations Compared with other countries in the region (see Appendix
for case studies of India, Pakistan and Vietnam), the lessons to be taken away
are: India introduced an Open Acreage licensing policy Contractors can select
exploration blocks  throughout the year without waiting for the formal bidding
round from the government It 10 OIES: Natural Gas in Pakistan and Bangladesh
Current issues and Trends Ieda Gomes 2013 185 of 244 also introduced freedom for
pricing and marketing of gas produced in the domestic market for contractors,
uniform licensing system and reduced royalty in all areas India also linked the
gas price for producers to prices in international gas hubs, rather than 
bunker fuel and set  higher ceiling for the gas price from high cost fields,
such as those in deep sea and high-pressure high-temperature areas Myanmar had
some success in its offshore waters adjacent to Bangladesh’ continental shelf
Woodside Energy has made three gas discoveries in 2016 and Shell has an equity
share in two of these and is operating five other blocks Total has been
operating the Yadana field since it started production in 1998 and started up
production in Badamyar in Chevron, however, after signing  new PSC in 2015, put
its assets up for sale in Key features of Myanmar’ petroleum fiscal terms for
PSCs are summarised in Appendix   key difference from the terms in Bangladesh’
PSCs is that exports of gas are allowed and that gas prices are not presented in
the contract On the other hand, the profit share in the Bangladesh contract is
biddable, , more flexible As for the bureaucracy involved in the selection of
investors, there are no specific studies of the oil and gas sector There are,
however Benchmark studies of Public Procurement11 providing  comparative
evaluation of legal and regulatory environments that affect the ability of
private sector companies to do business with governments in 180 economies The
Benchmarking shows that Bangladesh on average does better than other South Asian
countries, including the two other oil and gas producers in the region, India
and Pakistan, on needs assessment, call for tender, and bid preparation, bid
submission phase, bid opening, evaluation, contract award phase and management
of the procurement contract12 Bangladesh scores lower than the other countries
on performance guarantee and on the time and procedure needed for suppliers to
receive payment Having ruled out systematic barriers in the legal and regulatory
environment, the reason for the low response to the bidding rounds in Bangladesh
may be found in the institutional setup of the bidding round and the obligation
to sell the gas in Bangladesh at  pre-determined price formula Bangladesh has to
align the risk/award framework to attract foreign investors in competition with
other countries 11 World Bank: Benchmarking Public Procurement 2017 covers the
procurement process and complaint review mechanisms and indicates how the legal
and regulatory environment functions and how the procurement process works in
each country 12 with one exception: India scores slightly better on needs
assessment, call for tender, and bid preparation 186 of 244 Box no  Lessons
learned from gas regulation in India, Pakistan and Vietnam Appendix  reviews
lessons for Bangladesh from case studies of gas regulation in India, Pakistan
and Vietnam Some lessons are: Separate Regulation from policy function and
operations: In India, the Upstream Regulator, DGH is the technical arm of the
ministry and acts as  regulatory body having oversight on all concessions
relating to oil and gas to avoid potential conflicts of interest between the
NOCs and IOCs In Pakistan, the upstream oil and gas activities are regulated by
the Directorate General of Petroleum Concessions (DGPC) The downstream regulator
in Pakistan is independent from the Ministry, and the government-controlled
companies Both DGH and DGPC are managing bidding rounds in their countries Like
Bangladesh, Vietnam has  dominant state-owned oil and gas company that is
delegated by the government to carry out petroleum exploitation and exploration,
signing oil and gas contracts and supervising IOCs operating in the sector Its
subsidiary, PV Gas links gas from the upstream gas supplies to the end-users and
has the sole rights to distribution pipeline development This model can benefit
the sector in the early stages of oil and gas development but can also delay
later developments due to potential conflicts of interest, self-regulation, and
lack of independent regulation Update Petroleum policies: The Governments of
both India and Pakistan issue petroleum policies on  regular basis, to adjust to
the country’ needs, to international markets and developments and to attract
international investors Bangladesh issued  Petroleum policy 1993 that has not
been updated Options for  more competitive gas industry: The Government of
Pakistan has been assessing the performance of Pakistan’ natural gas sector and
developed options for the future direction of the sector towards  competitive
and deregulated sector with increased private sector participation This would
among other things involve overcoming the current barriers to selling directly
to customers at prices that are higher than today and at the same time fully
cover costs, including future gas supply and LNG imports Regulatory framework
Upstream Regulation Petrobangla has  role as the upstream regulator, supervising
and monitoring the PSCs at the same time it is the counterpart to the contracts
It is also self-regulating its own operations, including its subsidiaries PSC
Directorate of Petrobangla has 30 years experience of administering the PSC and
some opportunities are still left behind to strengthen the existing PSC
structure of Petrobangla to boost up exploration activities The current model
for upstream regulation in Bangladesh has been benefitting the sector especially
in the early stages of oil and gas development However, in the future it may
delay oil 187 of 244 and gas developments in later stages due to potential
conflicts of interest, self-regulation, and lack of an independent regulator The
introduction of independent regulation can give potential investors confidence
that conflict of interests between Petrobangla and the investors will not lead
to biased decisions Alignment with international best practice in the long term
can therefore increase the investments in the offshore and boost gas production
In the meantime, Bangladesh currently has  more complex bureaucratic system
comparing to international average – some simplifications on this can accelerate
investment cycles, and be more attractive to foreign investors as  result It
needs to be acknowledged that  tie-in of upstream regulation and exploration
activities by two different organizations/agencies can be  time-consuming event
Petrobangla’ experience of administering the PSC for last 30 years also needs to
be recognised, such that Petrobangla’ focus to boost up exploration activities
should be supported but not hammered if relevant authorities consider setting up
an independent regulation agency in due course Below are some key
characteristics of an independent upstream regulator:  Have regulatory
functions only  Not have Policy functions – they should be in the Ministry’
domain  Be an Adviser to the Ministry: Ministry signs Petroleum contracts on
the advice of the Regulator  Upstream Regulator should be placed under the line
Ministry, not in the State-owned Oil and Gas Company  Have independent funding
and staggered staff appointments  Streamline data and information gathering
from the companies and provide information to the public  The Upstream
regulator manages the bidding rounds, and direct negotiations with petroleum
investors Link the Upstream Regulator’ funding to the revenue received from
industry fees, but budget  is still approved by the government  Give
incentives to improve efficiency and capabilities of staff  Downstream Regulator
BERC The Gas Act 2010 regulates the downstream gas sector: the transmission,
distribution, marketing, supply and storage of natural gas The Act regulates
almost all forms of gases with energy content: Natural Gas, LNG, CNG, LPG, SNG,
NGLs, CBM BERC is empowered to apply the provisions of the Gas Act to issue,
renew, amend and cancel licenses for pipeline construction for gas transmission,
distribution, supply and storage The Act defines the customer classes for that
are used for the gas tariff (see Table 39) BERC sets the price for gas supply
and storage of gas, except for gas sold under PSCs for which the price is set
188 of 244 in the contract Finally, the Act determines penalties for operating
without  license or not following the license BERC was established by an Act in
2003, as an independent and impartial regulatory commission for the energy
sector in Bangladesh It is situated within the Ministry of Power, Energy and
Mineral Resources The Commission shall consist of  Chairman and four Members who
are full-time officers, appointed by the President on the basis of the proposal
of the Ministry The Chairman shall be the Chief Executive of the Commission Each
member is appointed for  three-year term The date of appointment of each member
is different and thus date of expiry of tenure of each member is also different
The decision of the meeting of the Commission shall be taken by  majority of
votes of the Members present However, in practice most of the decisions are
taken unanimously on consensus The main functions of the Commission include: to
ensure efficient use, quality services, determine tariff and safety enhancement
of  electricity generation and transmission, marketing, supply, storage and
distribution of energy (, the electricity, gas and petroleum products), which
includes the mandate to regulate downstream gas tariffs to determine gas tariffs
for transmission, marketing, supply, storage and distribution of gas  (and
other energy) to issue, cancel, amend, determine conditions of licenses, and
exemption of licenses  to approve the overall program of the licensee  to
promote competition amongst the licensees  to resolve disputes between the
licensees, and between licensees and consumers,  to ensure control of
environmental standard of energy under existing laws   Tariff Determination
Section 34 of the BERC Act 2003 provides the following policy framework for
tariff determination:  harmonisation of the tariff with the cost of production,
transmission, marketing, distribution, supply and storage of energy;
efficiency, least cost, excellent service, excellent investment;  consumers’
interest BERC’ License Regulations and Funding are summarised in Appendix
Imports of LNG and move towards  competitive gas market The costs of imports
will be higher than the current cost of indigenous gas production Bangladesh
should start  discussion of how to price the higher LNG costs and which
customers are going to pay the higher price 189 of 244 Today’ gas market
structure can be characterised as  single-buyer model with  complex system of
administered internal transfer prices Petrobangla acquires gas from IOCs at PSC
contract prices, mixes it with its own gas from subsidiaries, then other
subsidiaries transmit and distribute it to their customers In other words, the
Government is allocating gas to consumers and administering  bundled gas price
set by BERC Bundled prices, which do not differentiate between the price of gas
as  commodity and the cost of transmission and distribution, have undesirable
implications as they lead to inefficient pricing, they do not show financial
viability of the various segments production, transmission, and distribution,
and they result in cross- subsidies Petrobangla has right of first refusal on
all gas produced by IOCs under PSC contracts; if it does not exercise this
right, producers can sell to third parties in Bangladesh at  price equal to the
price Petrobangla pays Producers compete to explore for and produce gas through
the bidding on PSCs Competition for PSC contracts is in theory good, but it will
not necessarily reduce the price of gas for consumers as Petrobangla has no
incentive to buy gas at the lowest possible price and pass through the cost
savings to consumers under the current system In addition, there is no pressure
or incentive to reduce transmission and distribution costs In general, the
options for introducing LNG in the current gas market structure in Bangladesh
include:  As  single buyer of gas, Petrobangla can continue to mix the higher
priced LNG imports with gas from PSCs and its own gas GTCL and Petrobangla
subsidiaries then transmit and distribute the gas to its customers at  bundled
gas price set by the Government  Establish two markets for gas: ) The current
low-priced gas supplied by Petrobangla subsidiaries to their customers at
regulated prices, and )  market for new gas supply at (higher) market prices to
customers willing to pay the higher price to get gas supply LNG importers could
be government–owned companies (Petrobangla, Power Cell) or private, selling gas
at unregulated prices to customers willing to pay the price Single Buyer of gas
The first option continues the single buyer model: Petrobangla acquires LNG
imports, gas from IOCs at PSC contract prices, mixes it with its own gas from
subsidiaries, then transmits the gas and distributes it to its customers through
GTCL and distribution companies This would of course result in  higher cost base
and reduce Petrobangla’ margin, so higher sales prices would be required These
could be  general tariff increase to all consumer categories, or focusing the
price increases to certain customer categories, able to pay the higher price
This option is not recommended as it would continue cross-subsidies, inefficient
allocation of resources and distorted pricing and reduce the economic growth
rate in the medium and long term Dual markets for gas 190 of 244 The key issue
in this option is to determine the customers’ willingness and ability to pay
higher price to get gas supplied by new LNG imports These customers would be
creditworthy industries and new efficient power plants that have high base load
and that are not able to get sufficient gas at the current tariff due to gas
supply shortages The remaining gas customers would continue to buy gas under the
current tariff schedules  at regulated prices These customers would be
fertiliser, old power stations, tea gardens and residential/commercial To allow
private or public importers of LNG to sell gas to creditworthy industries and
power plants unable to get sufficient gas at the current tariff, they would need
access to the transmission and distribution network to reach their customers
unless they supply new customers close to the LNG landing points through their
own pipelines Non-discriminatory access (Third Party Access (TPA)) to gas
transmission and distribution networks will allow third parties to reach the
customers using the existing gas infrastructure The national gas transmission
company, GTCL, was established to separate gas transmission system from
distribution, and while not all gas transmission assets have been transferred to
GTCL from other Petrobangla subsidiaries and while GTCL does not provide third
party access today, its articles of association permit it to operate as  common
carrier What does it take to introduce third party access? Box no  shows the
experience in the European Union, which of course is  more complicated case
since it involves both opening up to competition in gas trade within countries
and to cross-border trade between countries Box no  Introduction of Third Party
Access and competition in European gas markets One of the core objectives of the
European Union was  single market for gas It took about 15 years to reach that
objective 1998 Gas Directive It started with the 1998 Gas Directive, which
introduced  new legal framework aimed at opening the gas networks to third
parties This was to be achieved through unbundling of the existing vertically
integrated gas operators, thus allowing competition for supplies and customers
within the natural monopoly network Initially, big gas customers, such as power
plants and big industrial consumers could choose their gas supplier At least 20%
of the national market had to be open for competition To ensure transparent and
non-discriminatory access to all potential suppliers of the market, the operator
of the transmission system was to be unbundled, minimum at an accounting level
The monitoring of this new system was assigned to  regulatory body in each
country, which had to be independent from the market and from the state, to
ensure transparent and non- discriminatory operations on the market 191 of 244
2003, the Second Gas Directive Several markets opened more up to competition
than the required consumption level (79% vs the minimum of 20%) The second Gas
Directive mandated regulated TPA as the basic rule for all existing
infrastructure, opening of the market for all customers, as well as moving the
level of unbundling of Transmission System Operators to the level of legal
separation ( regulated activities under the responsibility of separate entities)
2009, Directive on Internal market in gas This Directive ruled that from 2012
Member States had to unbundle transmission systems and transmission system
operators Some of the first steps shown in Box  have already been implemented in
Bangladesh  regulatory body has been established to monitor the transmission
system: BERC regulates the downstream gas sector  part of the transmission
system has been unbundled as GTCL is unbundled at the accounting level However,
TGTDCL, KGDCL, and JGTDSL also own and operate transmission pipelines in their
supply areas These are integrated with GTCL’ transmission pipelines, but owned
and operated by the regional companies These transmission assets need to be
unbundled at the accounting level The next step would be to mandate non-
discriminatory regulated TPA as the basic rule for the GTCL transmission network
and legally separate GTCL from Petrobangla BERC’ Act and License Regulations
would need to be updated to include appropriate tariff methodology, new licenses
and additional responsibilities for the regulation of TPA to pipelines to enable
the downstream regulator to promote competition in the gas market and ensure
smooth transition The opening of the gas market could start with GTCL’ 1396 km
network and GTCL is currently expanding transmission capacity from Cox’ Bazar
where the LNG will be landed to Bakhrabad However, it is recommended to continue
the transfer of all transmission assets to GTCL, so that more industries and
power plants could be served by TPA from the high-pressure pipelines or by
spurline connected directly to these pipelines For TPA to work,  number of
technical matters needs to be solved Licenses for import of gas (LNG),
transmission, shipping and sale of gas (and later distribution of gas) will need
to be drafted and agreed by the gas companies, traders and consumers and the
regulator  network code would need to be introduced for gas transmission to
support market liberalisation This includes  set of rules for gas flows in the
system ensuring that competition can be facilitated on level terms It includes
transmission tariffs, determines Entry and Exit points for gas in the system,
and governs processes such as the balancing of the gas system, network planning,
and the allocation of network capacity It should also be considered to include
offshore pipelines in the TPA system to give incentives to the development of
marginal offshore fields 192 of 244 To reach  fully competitive gas market, the
operation of GTCL would need to be unbundled from the Petrobangla ownership, and
competition should be extended to customers served by the distribution companies
These companies would need to legally separate their trading and distribution
functions to provide third party access through their networks and introduce
distribution system network codes As part of the gas sector reforms in Pakistan,
the Government decided to open up the country’ gas market to third parties to
promote imports of pipeline gas and LNG and facilitate the growth of the gas
sector The Government has issued policy documents for public comments to set the
high-level principles for TPA, network code and gas transportation tariff (see
Appendix ) Timing of introduction of dual markets LNG imports are expected to
start in 2018 when the first FSRU is commissioned, followed by  second FSRU in
2019 and  third unit in 2021 (see Gas Sector Roadmap) The Roadmap for the
pricing and regulatory changes is based on the assumption that it will take -
years to decide and implement the regulatory measures required to open the gas
market to TPA In this period, the higher costs of LNG imports should be mixed
with gas from PSCs and Petrobangla’ own gas From around 2021, the licenses,
rules for TPA and network codes will be in place so that eligible customers can
buy gas directly from suppliers 10 Findings and recommendations - legal and
regulatory analysis Our analysis and review of the institutional and regulatory
framework in Bangladesh has been centred around answering the central question
of how reforms could support  least cost supply solution to Bangladesh It is
clear from the previous analysis that the infrastructure needs are very much
dependent on the development in both gas demand and supply Gas demand and supply
is in many ways  function of the regulatory environment, thus the choices and
recommendations made in this respect will have an indirect impact on the
infrastructure requirements 193 of 244 MAIN FINDING: SHORTAGE OF GAS
NECCESITATES RECONSIDERATION OF THE GAS UTILISATION GUIDELINES RECOMMENDATION:
RECONSIDER THE ALLOCATION OF GAS ON SECTORS AND THE GAS UTILISATION GUIDELINES
FOR DOMESTIC GAS ALLOCATION WHEN GAS SHORTAGES PREVAIL The Economic value of gas
is highest when used for CNG in vehicles, replacing oil products in power
generation and to produce fertiliser The Guidelines put fertiliser as the top
priority and CNG as the lowest priority The Consultants does not agree with this
priority; More gas should be allocated to the sectors where the economic value
is highest,  CNG, replacing petroleum products in the power sector, and in the
fertiliser sector MAIN FINDING: PRICING OF LNG IMPORTS AND SEGMENTATION OF THE
MARKETS NEEDS TO BE ADRESSED Since 2014, Bangladesh' gas price has gone up by
almost USD /MMbtu There has been  sharp increase in the price paid by CNG users,
commercial, captive power and domestic metered gas consumption However,
Bangladesh' gas prices are in the lower half compared with other countries
(around the 40% benchmark) Soon LNG will be imported at higher costs than the
current gas purchases from PSCs and Petrobangla subsidiaries This will
necessitate an increase in the gas tariff in the short term However,
continuation of the current model in which Petrobangla acquires LNG imports;
purchases gas from IOCs at PSC contract prices, mixing it with its own gas from
subsidiaries, then transmits the gas and distributes it to its customers through
GTCL and distribution companies, is not recommended as it would continue cross-
subsidies, inefficient allocation of resources and distorted pricing and reduce
the economic growth rate in the medium and long term This should be phased out
over the medium term RECOMMENDATION: INTRODUCE DUAL MARKETS FOR GAS PROTECTING
THE DOMESTIC MARKET WHILE INTRODUCING MARKET BASED PRICES FOR THE MOST EFFICIENT
AND CREDITWORTHY USERS This option allows for  gradual transition to  more
competitive gas market As domestic gas production from existing fields continue
to fall over time and higher cost supply from new fields and imports increase
over time, more gas will be sold at the new, higher price This may also spur new
domestic production to come on stream  key issue is to determine the customers’
willingness and ability to pay  higher price to get gas supplied by new LNG
imports 194 of 244 The analysis in Table 40 showed that in key sectors, power
generation and fertilizer, less that one quarter of the of economic value of gas
is captured At today’ lower oil prices this would be correspond to less than 50%
captured, indicating that the gas has  higher economic value for the customers
in these sectors and they should be able to pay  higher price RECOMMENDATION:
INTRODUCE NON-DISCRIMINATORY ACCESS TO TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION NETWORKS
The introduction of non-discriminatory access to transmission and distribution
networks will contribute to  move towards more competition Today, GTCL is
already unbundled at the accounting level However, three transmission and
distribution companies also own and operate transmission pipelines in their
supply areas, although integrated with GTCL’ transmission pipelines These
transmission assets need to be unbundled at the accounting level It is
recommended to develop tariffs for transmission and distribution of gas, that
will ensure both transmission and distribution companies sufficient funds for
self-financing of their investment in expansions of the gas networks to
accommodate future growth RECOMMENDATION: EMPOWER BERC TO DETERMINE THIRD PARTY
ACCESS TARIFFS FOR TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF GAS BERC regulatory
capabilities should be enhanced to determine transmission and distribution
tariffs for third parties to enable customers to buy gas at deregulated prices
Third party access to storage should be added when relevant BERC should also
issue licenses for import of gas, transmission, distribution, shipping and sale
of gas Network codes for transmission, distribution (and storage, when relevant)
of gas should be developed by BERC MAIN FINDING: REGULATORY INDEPENDENCE
DOWNSTREAM BUT UPSTREAM INDEPENDENCE LACKING Although situated within the
ministry, the setup of BERC provides  framework for independent downstream
regulation through the Gas Act, the BERC Act, the funding provisions,
appointment procedures and statutes Petrobangla has  potential conflict of
interest role as the upstream gas regulator, supervising and monitoring the PSCs
and self-regulating its own operations, including its subsidiaries 195 of 244
RECOMMENDATION: CONSIDER MOVING THE TECHNICAL UPSTREAM REGULATION INTO AN
INDEPENDENT AGENCY AND KEEP THE POLICY FUNCTIONS IN THE MINISTRY An independent
upstream Regulator, for example BERC, separate from Petrobangla and the Ministry
could potentially reduce potential conflicts of interests between Petrobangla,
its subsidiaries and the regulated industry It would be able to focus on
regulatory functions only, and not have any policy functions, as they should be
handled by the Ministry This could create  more effective regulator to monitor
and approve petroleum activities for compliance with regulations and work
programs, collect and store data, manage bidding rounds and direct negotiations
with petroleum investors, and granting PSCs This could ensure  more timely
execution of petroleum sector oversight, leading to increased activities and
production in the long term The 2006 Gas Sector Master Plan recommended an
Upstream Licensing Authority to supervise and monitor the activities of the IOCs
This has not yet been implemented Nevertheless, it needs to be acknowledged that
tie-in of upstream regulation and exploration activities by two different
organizations/agencies can be  time-consuming event Petrobangla’ experience of
administering the PSC for last 30 years also needs to be recognised, such that
Petrobangla’ focus to boost up exploration activities should be supported but
not hammered if relevant authorities consider setting up an independent
regulation agency in due course 196 of 244 APPENDIX : KEY DATA TABLES Table 41:
Historical Primary Energy Consumption per Capita Bangladesh China India
Indonesia Myanmar Pakistan Thailand Vietnam Data Source World Bank World Bank
World Bank World Bank World Bank World Bank World Bank World Bank Year / Unit
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 toe 13 13 13 14 14 14 14 15 15 16 16 16 17 17 18 19 20
21 21 22 22 toe 82 87 88 87 87 88 90 93 98 12 27 39 52 63 67 78 95 09 16 21 24
toe 37 39 39 40 40 42 42 42 42 43 44 45 47 49 50 55 56 58 60 61 64 toe 61 66 68
69 67 69 74 74 76 75 79 79 80 79 79 85 88 83 85 87 89 toe 26 26 26 26 27 26 27
26 27 29 30 30 30 31 30 28 27 27 30 31 36 toe 43 44 45 45 45 46 46 46 46 47 49
50 51 53 51 50 50 49 49 49 49 toe 96 04 16 16 08 14 15 17 28 37 47 50 53 59 63
62 77 76 88 01 99 toe 29 30 32 34 35 36 37 39 42 44 48 50 51 54 57 62 68 67 67
67 68 Table 42: Historical Bangladesh Statistics - Macro Factors GDP @ constant
2010 USD Primary Energy Consumption Per Capita Electricity Consumption Per
Capita GDP Growth Rate GDP by Sector ‐ Agriculture GDP by Sector ‐ Industry GDP
by Sector ‐ Services World Bank/ Ramboll Data Source World Bank World Bank World
Bank World Bank World Bank World Bank Year / Unit 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 USD
Billion / toe 13 14 14 14 14 15 15 16 16 16 17 17 18 19 20 21 21 22 22 / / KWh
80 81 86 94 102 112 120 126 161 171 192 201 202 220 241 258 276 294 311 / / % %
% % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % / 24% 24% 24% 24% 24% 23% 22% 21% 20% 20%
19% 19% 18% 18% 18% 18% 17% 16% 16% 16% / 23% 23% 24% 23% 23% 24% 24% 24% 24%
25% 25% 26% 26% 26% 26% 26% 27% 28% 28% 28% / 53% 53% 52% 53% 53% 53% 54% 55%
56% 56% 56% 56% 56% 56% 56% 56% 56% 56% 56% 56% / 197 of 244 Table 43:
Historical Bangladesh Statistics - Gas Sector Gas Consumption ‐ Industry (incl
Tea & Brick) Petrobangla/ Ramboll mmcfd 79 82 92 101 116 135 150 178 130 144 176
215 255 288 328 335 354 374 391 407 430 Gas Consumption ‐ Captive Power
Petrobangla/ Ramboll mmcfd         88 104 134 256 220 259 308 332 339 367 394
411 441 Gas Consumption ‐ Domestic Gas Consumption ‐ Commercial Gas Consumption
‐ CNG Gas Consumption ‐ Total Gas Consumption ‐ Fertiliser Gas Consumption ‐
Power Petrobangla/ Ramboll mmcfd 304 304 339 386 404 480 521 522 546 578 615 606
642 702 776 750 834 901 924 972 1095 Petrobangla/ Ramboll mmcfd 249 213 219 227
228 242 216 263 254 258 244 171 216 205 177 172 160 164 147 147 144 Petrobangla/
Ramboll mmcfd 57 62 68 74 81 87 101 123 135 144 155 173 189 202 227 239 244 246
278 324 388 Petrobangla/ Ramboll mmcfd  12 13 13 11 11 12 13 13 13  16 18 21 22
23 24 24 24 25 25 Petrobangla/ Ramboll mmcfd          10 19 33 62 85 108 105 106
110 110 118 127 Petrobangla/ Ramboll mmcfd 698 673 730 800 841 956 999 1099 1171
1250 1351 1470 1602 1762 1946 1958 2060 2187 2269 2404 2649 Data Source Year /
Unit 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Table 44: Historical Bangladesh Statistics -
Ln(GDP) and Ln(Gas Demand) Ln(GDP) Ln(Gas_Ind) Ln(Gas_Dom) Ln(Gas_Com)
Ln(Gas_CNG) Data Source Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Year / Unit 1995
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012 2013 2014 2015 Ln(US$bn) 01 06 11 15 20 25 29 34 39 45 52 59 64 69 75 81 87
93 99 05 ‐ Ln(mcfd) ‐ Ln(mcfd) ‐ Ln(mcfd)               ‐ Ln(mcfd) ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐ ‐
‐ 198 of 244 Table 45: Historical Bangladesh Statistics - Power Sector Mix Grid
Power Generation ‐ Gas Grid Power Generation ‐ Oil Grid Power Generation ‐ Coal
Grid Power Generation ‐ Nuclear Grid Power Generation ‐ Renewables Grid Power
Generation ‐ Hydro Grid Power Generation ‐ Import Power Budgetary Support BPDB
Annual Reports % of total / / / / / / / / / / / / 86% 88% 89% 82% 79% 78% 72%
69% 69% BPDB Annual Reports BPDB Annual Reports BPDB Annual Reports BPDB Annual
Reports BPDB Annual Reports BPDB Annual Reports 7th FYP Data Source Taka Billion
/ / / / / / / / / / / / / / / 10 45 60 52 61 60 Year / Unit 1995 1996 1997 1998
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2015 / / / / / / / / / / / / % % % 13% 16% 17% 18% 20% 21% / / / / / / / / / / /
/ % % % % % % % % % / / / / / / / / / / / / % % % % % % % % % / / / / / / / / /
/ / / % % % % % % % % % / / / / / / / / / / / / % % % % % % % % % / / / / / / /
/ / / / / % % % % % % % % % Table 46: Forecasts - GDP Growth and Power Gas Share
of Total Power Gen ‐ Scenario  Gas Share of Total Power Gen ‐ Scenario  Gas
Share of Total Power Gen ‐ Scenario  Total Power Demand ‐ Scebario  Total Power
Demand ‐ Scebario  Total Power Demand ‐ Scebario  GDP Growth Rate ‐ Scebario
GDP Growth Rate ‐ Scebario  GDP Growth Rate ‐ Scebario  7th FYP/ Ramboll 7th
FYP/ Ramboll 7th FYP/ Ramboll Petrobangla/ BPBD TWh 62 67 73 80 88 96 104 112
121 130 139 148 156 166 175 185 195 206 216 227 237 247 258 270 280 Petrobangla/
BPBD Data Source PSMP2016 Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Year / Unit 2016 2017 2018
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034
2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 TWh 62 67 73 80 88 96 104 112 121 130 139 148 156
166 175 185 195 206 216 227 237 247 258 270 280 TWh 62 67 73 80 87 94 102 110
119 128 137 147 157 169 181 195 210 226 243 262 282 303 327 352 377 % % % % % %
% % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % %
% % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % 70% 70% 70% 70% 66%
62% 59% 55% 52% 49% 46% 43% 41% 39% 36% 34% 32% 30% 29% 27% 25% 24% 22% 21% 20%
70% 70% 70% 70% 68% 66% 65% 63% 61% 60% 58% 57% 55% 54% 52% 51% 50% 48% 47% 46%
45% 44% 42% 41% 40% / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / 199 of 244
Table 47: Forecasts - Gas Demand by Sector - Scenario  Scenario  Gas Demand ‐
Captive Power Ramboll mmcfd 480 480 480 480 480 432 389 350 315 283 255 230 207
186 167 151 136 122 110 99 89 80 72 65 58 Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Commercial
(incl Tea) Ramboll mmcfd 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38
38 38 38 38 38 38 38 Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Total Scenario  Gas Demand ‐
Fertiliser Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Power Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Industry Scenario
Gas Demand ‐ Domestic Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ CNG Ramboll mmcfd 3736 3852 3996
4163 4214 4224 4274 4331 4396 4467 4543 4704 4853 5005 5207 5378 5532 5695 5851
6009 6155 6291 6433 6579 6713 Ramboll mmcfd 1796 1833 1887 1950 1890 1824 1753
1679 1603 1524 1445 1445 1429 1414 1447 1450 1436 1434 1427 1427 1420 1401 1388
1379 1358 Ramboll mmcfd 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316
316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 Ramboll mmcfd 542 621 710 814 925
1044 1169 1299 1435 1575 1718 1863 2009 2156 2302 2447 2589 2728 2863 2994 3119
3244 3368 3491 3613 Ramboll mmcfd 425 425 425 425 425 425 457 490 524 557 590
624 656 689 721 752 782 811 839 867 893 918 944 969 994 Ramboll mmcfd 139 139
139 139 139 145 152 159 166 173 181 189 198 207 216 226 236 246 257 269 281 294
307 321 335 Data Source Year / Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040
Table 48: Forecasts - Gas Demand by Franchise Area - Scenario  Scenario  Gas
Demand ‐ Total Scenario  ‐ BGDCL Scenario  ‐ JGTDSL Scenario  ‐ KGDCL Scenario
‐ PGCL Scenario  ‐ SGCL Scenario  ‐ TGTDCL Ramboll mmcfd 3736 3852 3996 4163
4214 4224 4274 4331 4396 4467 4543 4704 4853 5005 5207 5378 5532 5695 5851 6009
6155 6291 6433 6579 6713 Ramboll mmcfd 420 433 449 468 474 475 481 487 494 502
511 529 546 563 585 605 622 640 658 676 692 707 723 740 755 Ramboll mmcfd 391
403 418 435 441 442 447 453 460 467 475 492 507 523 544 562 578 595 612 628 644
658 673 688 702 Ramboll mmcfd 533 549 570 593 601 602 609 617 627 637 648 671
692 714 742 767 789 812 834 857 878 897 917 938 957 Ramboll mmcfd 141 146 151
158 160 160 162 164 166 169 172 178 184 190 197 204 209 216 222 228 233 238 244
249 254 Ramboll mmcfd 424 438 454 473 479 480 486 492 499 507 516 535 551 569
592 611 629 647 665 683 699 715 731 747 763 Ramboll mmcfd 1827 1883 1954 2035
2060 2065 2090 2118 2149 2184 2221 2300 2373 2447 2546 2629 2705 2784 2861 2938
3010 3076 3145 3217 3282 Data Source Year / Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037
2038 2039 2040 200 of 244 Table 49: Forecasts - Gas Demand by Sector - Scenario
Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Captive Power Ramboll mmcfd 480 480 480 480 480 432 389
350 315 283 255 230 207 186 167 151 136 122 110 99 89 80 72 65 58 Scenario  Gas
Demand ‐ Commercial (incl Tea) Ramboll mmcfd 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38
38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Total Scenario
Gas Demand ‐ Fertiliser Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Power Scenario  Gas Demand ‐
Industry Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Domestic Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ CNG Ramboll
mmcfd 3736 3852 3996 4183 4290 4361 4472 4595 4730 4876 5033 5189 5379 5651 6012
6354 6691 7068 7461 7891 8331 8767 9231 9725 10208 Ramboll mmcfd 1796 1833 1887
1971 1978 1982 1983 1982 1978 1972 1964 1942 1942 2011 2159 2276 2379 2510 2648
2813 2981 3136 3311 3509 3690 Ramboll mmcfd 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316
316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 Ramboll mmcfd
542 621 710 814 914 1022 1138 1263 1396 1537 1687 1846 2012 2187 2370 2560 2758
2964 3176 3395 3620 3851 4087 4329 4575 Ramboll mmcfd 425 425 425 425 425 425
456 488 521 556 592 629 667 706 746 787 829 872 916 961 1007 1053 1100 1147 1196
Ramboll mmcfd 139 139 139 139 139 145 152 159 166 173 181 189 198 207 216 226
236 246 257 269 281 294 307 321 335 Data Source Year / Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035
2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 201 of 244 Table 50: Forecasts - Gas Demand by
Franchise Area - Scenario  Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Total Scenario  ‐ BGDCL
Scenario  ‐ JGTDSL Scenario  ‐ KGDCL Scenario  ‐ PGCL Scenario  ‐ SGCL Scenario
‐ TGTDCL Ramboll mmcfd 3736 3852 3996 4183 4290 4361 4472 4595 4730 4876 5033
5189 5379 5651 6012 6354 6691 7068 7461 7891 8331 8767 9231 9725 10208 Ramboll
mmcfd 420 433 449 470 482 490 503 517 532 548 566 584 605 635 676 714 752 795
839 887 937 986 1038 1094 1148 Ramboll mmcfd 391 403 418 437 449 456 468 480 495
510 526 543 562 591 629 664 700 739 780 825 871 917 965 1017 1067 Ramboll mmcfd
533 549 570 596 612 622 638 655 674 695 717 740 767 806 857 906 954 1008 1064
1125 1188 1250 1316 1386 1455 Ramboll mmcfd 141 146 151 158 162 165 169 174 179
185 191 196 204 214 228 241 253 268 283 299 315 332 350 368 387 Ramboll mmcfd
424 438 454 475 487 495 508 522 537 554 572 590 611 642 683 722 760 803 848 897
947 996 1049 1105 1160 Ramboll mmcfd 1827 1883 1954 2045 2098 2132 2187 2247
2313 2384 2461 2537 2630 2763 2940 3107 3272 3456 3648 3858 4074 4287 4514 4755
4991 Data Source Year / Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 202
of 244 Table 51: Forecasts - Gas Demand by Sector - Scenario  Scenario  Gas
Demand ‐ Captive Power Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Commercial (incl Tea) Scenario
Gas Demand ‐ CNG Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Total Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Fertiliser
Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Power Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Industry Scenario  Gas
Demand ‐ Domestic Petrobangla/ BPBD mmcfd 1796 1882 2043 2266 2197 2210 2266
2279 2285 2315 2319 2389 2490 2467 2468 2601 2692 2752 2857 2950 2930 2995 2985
2993 2991 Data Source Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll
Year / Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 mmcfd 3736 3901 4151
4478 4520 4610 4787 4931 5078 5257 5417 5648 5914 6058 6228 6529 6788 7013 7281
7532 7666 7885 8030 8193 8346 mmcfd 480 480 480 480 480 432 389 350 315 283 255
230 207 186 167 151 136 122 110 99 89 80 72 65 58 mmcfd 316 316 316 316 316 316
316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316 316
mmcfd 542 621 710 814 925 1044 1169 1299 1435 1575 1718 1863 2009 2156 2302 2447
2589 2728 2863 2994 3119 3244 3368 3491 3613 mmcfd 425 425 425 425 425 425 457
490 524 557 590 624 656 689 721 752 782 811 839 867 893 918 944 969 994 mmcfd 38
38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 mmcfd
139 139 139 139 139 145 152 159 166 173 181 189 198 207 216 226 236 246 257 269
281 294 307 321 335 203 of 244 Table 52: Forecasts - Gas Demand by Franchise
Area - Scenario  Scenario  Gas Demand ‐ Total Scenario  ‐ BGDCL Scenario  ‐
JGTDSL Scenario  ‐ KGDCL Scenario  ‐ PGCL Scenario  ‐ SGCL Scenario  ‐ TGTDCL
Data Source Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Ramboll Year / Unit
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031
2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 mmcfd 3736 3901 4151 4478 4520 4610
4787 4931 5078 5257 5417 5648 5914 6058 6228 6529 6788 7013 7281 7532 7666 7885
8030 8193 8346 mmcfd 420 439 467 504 508 518 538 555 571 591 609 635 665 681 700
734 763 789 819 847 862 887 903 921 939 mmcfd 391 408 434 468 473 482 501 516
531 550 566 591 618 633 651 683 710 733 761 788 802 825 840 857 873 mmcfd 533
556 592 638 644 657 682 703 724 749 772 805 843 864 888 931 968 1000 1038 1074
1093 1124 1145 1168 1190 mmcfd 141 148 157 170 171 175 181 187 192 199 205 214
224 229 236 247 257 266 276 285 290 299 304 310 316 mmcfd 424 443 472 509 514
524 544 560 577 597 616 642 672 688 708 742 771 797 827 856 871 896 912 931 948
mmcfd 1827 1907 2030 2190 2210 2254 2340 2411 2483 2570 2649 2762 2892 2962 3045
3192 3319 3429 3560 3683 3748 3855 3926 4006 4081 Table 53: Forecasts - Gas
Supply - Indigenous Production Indigenous Production ‐ Thin Bed and Accelerated
& Indigenous Production ‐ Total Indigenous Production ‐ Existing Fields
Indigenous Production ‐ Additional 2P Indigenous Production ‐ Additional 3P
Indigenous Production ‐ Area  Indigenous Production ‐ Area  Indigenous
Production ‐ Area  Indigenous Production ‐ Area  Indigenous Production ‐ Area
Indigenous Production ‐ Area  Indigenous Production ‐ Area  Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd
197 427 592 658 658 658 658 658 658 658 652 490 353 192 110 41 14  Ramboll/ GEUS
mmcfd         99 263 427 592 756 822 822 822 822 822 819 737 627 490 340 178 96
Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd        99 263 427 592 756 822 822 822 822 822 819 737 627
490 340 178 96 41 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd             197 526 756 822 822 822 822
822 822 822 816 652 436 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd                   197 526 756 822
822 822 822 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd                      197 427 493 493 Ramboll/
GEUS mmcfd           99 164 263 329 329 329 329 329 329 329 329 329 329 329 329
Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd 2754 2849 2806 3011 2743 2639 2616 2492 2758 3134 3586 3814
4262 4703 4845 4886 4818 4698 4515 4473 4173 3929 3572 3023 2591 Ramboll/ GEUS
mmcfd 2754 2712 2669 2722 2414 2270 2306 1861 1636 1354 1198 1066 883 744 641
586 508 361 238 208 172 120 79 29  Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd     40 60 78 88 88 168
278 218 228 248 268 333 353 383 363 345 335 270 155 140 140 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd
15 15 35 95 110 245 330 335 360 455 555 550 515 505 510 520 525 450 430 385 270
235 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd  137 137 274 274 274 137 137                  Data
Source Year / Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 204 of 244
Table 54: Forecasts - Gas Demand Supply Blance - Scenario  with YTF Success Gas
Supply ‐ Thin Bed and Accelerated & Total Gas Supply ‐ Scenario  Gas Demand
Supply Blance ‐ Scenario  Total Gas Demand ‐ Scenario  Gas Supply ‐ Existing
Fields Gas Supply ‐ Additional 2P Gas Supply ‐ Additional 3P Gas Supply ‐ YTF
Gas Supply ‐ Import Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd 2754 2712 2669 2722 2414 2270 2306 1861
1636 1354 1198 1066 883 744 641 586 508 361 238 208 172 120 79 29  Ramboll/ GEUS
mmcfd     40 60 78 88 88 168 278 218 228 248 268 333 353 383 363 345 335 270 155
140 140 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd    15 15 35 95 110 245 330 335 360 455 555 550 515
505 510 520 525 450 430 385 270 235 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd  137 137 274 274 274 137
137                  Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd        296 789 1282 1775 2170 2696 3156
3386 3452 3452 3444 3395 3395 3216 3110 2953 2584 2216 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd   800
800 1200 1600 2171 2439 2321 2123 1831 1834 1652 1356 1383 1643 1970 2315 2766
3059 3493 3956 4458 5170 5755 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd 2754 2849 3606 3811 3943 4239
4787 4931 5078 5257 5417 5648 5914 6058 6228 6529 6788 7013 7281 7532 7666 7885
8030 8193 8346 Ramboll/ GEUS mmcfd ‐982 ‐1052 ‐545 ‐667 ‐578 ‐371
Data Source Ramboll Year / Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040
mmcfd 3736 3901 4151 4478 4520 4610 4787 4931 5078 5257 5417 5648 5914 6058 6228
6529 6788 7013 7281 7532 7666 7885 8030 8193 8346 Table 55: Bangladesh Gas Price
Reviews Domestic Metered Captive Power Industry Power Fertilizer Sector CNG
Commercial BERC/ Petrobangla Taka/mcf 05 05 00 00 00 00 30 30 70 29 55 00 00
BERC/ Petrobangla Taka/mcf 30 00 00 50 50 12 12 09 09 09 68 00 40 BERC/
Petrobangla Taka/mcf 40 00 00 10 10 00 00 25 25 25 22 50 00 BERC/ Petrobangla
Taka/mcf 21 00 00 00 50 59 59 26 26 26 73 30 70 BERC/ Petrobangla Taka/mcf 57 00
00 20 20 13 13 91 91 91 86 40 60 BERC/ Petrobangla Taka/mcf 98 00 00 45 45 91 91
82 82 82 82 65 60 BERC/ Petrobangla Taka/mcf 48 00 00 15 15 41 41 92 92 92 92 40
85 Data Source Date / Unit 2002 2002 2003 2004 2004 2005 2008 2009 2009 2011
2015 2017 2017 205 of 244 Table 56: World Bank Commodities Price Forecast (in
nominal USD) Natural gas, Europe Natural gas LNG, Japan Commodity Coal,
Australia Crude oil, avg Natural gas, US Data Source World Bank World Bank World
Bank World Bank World Bank Year / Unit 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2022 2023 2024 2025 2030* USD/MT USD/bbl USD/mmBtu             USD/mmBtu
USD/mmBtu           206 of 244 APPENDIX : LIST OF GAS FIRED POWER PLANTS Table
57: Existing Gas-fired Power Capacity # Existing Gas‐fired Power Plants Output
(MW)  Raojan (Chittagong) 2x210 MW 166  Raojan (Chittagong) 2x210 MW 166
SIKALBAHA (Chittagong) (60 MW) 39  Shikalbaha 150 MW PP 147  Ashuganj (Baria)
2x64 MW ST 89  Ashuganj (Baria) 3x150 MW ST 366  Ashuganj (Baria) 56 MW GT) 39
Ashuganj 50 MW Engine 44  Ashuganj 225 CCPP 218 10 Chandpur 150 MW CCPP 158 11
Ghorasal (Polash, Norshindi) 2x55 MW ST & 78 12 Ghorasal (Polash, Norshindi) 210
MW ST ,,& 672 13 SIDDHIRGANJ (210 MW) 138 14 SIDDHIRGANJ 2x120 MW ) 206 15
HARIPUR (96 MW) (Narayangonj) 59 16 Haripur 412 MW CCPP (EGCB) 400 17 TONGI (105
MW) (Dhaka) 103 18 Shahjibazar (Hobigonj) 2x35 MW GT & 65 19 Lump GT Publick Gas
~30MW (SYLHET (20 MW) 19 20 SYLHET (150 MW) PP 139 21 Fenchuganj 97 & 104 MW CC
BPDB 165 22 Lump GT Publick Gas ~100MW (Baghabari (Sirajgonj) 71 MW GT 69 23
Baghabari (Sirajgonj) 100 MW GT 98 24 Sirajganj 225 MW CCPP (1st Unit) 204 25
RPCL (Mymenshing) (210 MW) 202 26 Haripur Power Ltd (360 MW) 360 27 Meghnaghat
power Ltd (450 MW) 450 28 Ghorasal 108 MW IPP (Regent Power)) 108 29 Ashugonj
195 MW Modular PP 195 30 Bibiana‐II 341 MW CCPP (Summit) 341 31 Bogra 15 Years
RPP (GBB) 22 32 Kumargoan, Sylhet RPP (Energyprima) 50 33 Shahjibazar 15 Yrs RPP
(Shahjibazar Power) 86 34 Shahjibazar RPP (Energyprima) 50 35 Tangail SIPP
(Doreen) 22 36 Feni SIPP (Doreen) 22 37 Lump Gas Rental ~50 MW (Kumkargoan,
Sylhet 15 Years RPP (Desh Energy) 10 38 Barobkundo SIPP (Regent Power) 22 39
Bhola  Years RPP (Venture) 33 40 Jangalia, Comilla SIPP (Summit)) 33 41
Fenchuganj 15 Years RPP ( Barakatullah) 51 207 of 244 42 Ashugong 55 MW RPP
(Precision Energy)) 55 43 Fenchugonj RPP (Energy Prima) 44 44 Ghorasal 45 MW
QRPP (Aggreko) 45 45 Ghorasal 100 MW QRPP ( Aggreko) 100 46  Baria 70 MW QRPP (
Aggreco) 85 47 Lump Gas Rental ~100 MW (Ghorasal 78 MW QRPP (Max Power) 78 48
Ashugonj 80 MW QRPP (Aggreko) 95 49 Ashugonj 53 MW QRPP (United Power) 53 50
Shajahanullah Power Co Ltd 25 51 Summit Power( REB) 105 52 Bogra RPP (Energy
Prima) 20 53 Lump SIPP Gas (Hobiganj SIPP ( REB) (Confi‐Energypac) 11 54
Ullapara SIPP ( REB) (Summit) 11 55 Narsindi SIPP (REB) (Doreen) 22 56 Feni SIPP
(REB) (Doreen) 11 57 Mouna, Gazipur SIPP (REB) (Summit) 33 58 Rupganj ,
Narayanganj SIPP (REB) (Summit) 33 59 Ashugonj 51 MW IPP (Midland) 51 60 Bhola
225 MW CCPP 225 61 Bheramara 360 MW CCPP 360 62 Baghabari (Sirajganj) 71 MW 71
Subtotal ,437 Source: PSMP2016, PGCL, SGCL 208 of 244 Table 58: Committed New
Gas-fired Power Capacity # Committed Gas‐fired Power Plants Output (MW)
Siddirganj 335 MW CCPP 328  Ashuganj (North) CCPP 370  Ashuganj (South) CCPP 361
Ghorasal 363 MW (7th Unit) CCPP 352  Shajibazar CCPP 322  Shikalbaha 225 MW CCPP
218  Bibiana South CCPP BPDB 372  Bibiana III CCPP BPDB 388  Fenchugonj 50 MW
Power Plant (NRB) 50 10 Sylhet 150 MW PP Conversion 221 11 Ghorasal 3rd & 4th
Unit Repowering (Capacity Addition) 776 12 Kushiara 163 MW CCPP 163 13 Bagabari
71 MW PP Conversion 102 14 Sirajganj 414 MW CCPP (4th unit) 414 15 Shahajibazar
100 MW 98 16 Khulna 225 MW Power Plant 225 17 Khulna 800 MW Power Plant 800 18
Bhola 95 MW Power Plant 95 19 Sirajganj 225 MWCCPP (2nd Unit) 225 20 Sirajganj
225 MWCCPP (3nd Unit) 225 Subtotal ,105 Source: PSMP2016, PGCL, SGCL 209 of 244
APPENDIX : GAS SUPPLY VIA INDIA Background India’ economic progress is closely
linked to energy demand As the economy expands, the need for oil and gas is
expected to grow considerably Due to increase in demand of Natural Gas, India
decided to expand its in-house production of fossil fuel across the nation
Hence, vision 2030 has been formed to meet the supply demand of Natural Gas
Thereby, MoPNG (Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas) India started its survey
across country for untapped fossil fuel reserve in remote areas as well despite
ongoing political situations The Eastern region of India which marks the border
for Bangladesh is endowed with abundant resource of Natural Gas particularly
Assam & Tripura, which started contributing to India more than  centuries The
Natural Gas produced in Eastern region is being transported via pipelines to
supply the Natural Gas requirements to several sectors like, Power & Fertiliser,
Domestic & commercial industries The laying of new pipelines to connect Eastern
region of India will benefit the neighbouring countries like Bangladesh and
Myanmar to have transnational gas pipelines for their country’ ongoing and
future demand for natural gas The last part of this section provides our
optional views/possibilities for the gas pipeline hook-up to connect with
Bangladesh Demand prediction in India The Power, Fertiliser, Industrial and CGD
segments are expected to contribute to the bulk of future growth of natural gas
demand in India Natural gas demand from the power sector is expected to be
driven, not only by the shortage of domestic coal supply and the rising cost of
its substitute  imported coal but also by increased domestic gas supply and
power sector reforms Fertiliser industry is the only industry that uses chemical
and thermal heat of gas for its production and remains  major contributor to
natural gas demand in the country Due to latest technology innovations in the
fertiliser industries, it has been proposed to use LNG as feed/raw material
replacement, leading to  higher demand from fertiliser sector  higher emphasis
on food security in India and increasing import price of urea are expected to
drive the demand from the fertiliser sector 210 of 244 Figure 99: Historical
India gas demand break-Up Figure 100: Future India gas demand break-Up Supply
prediction & plans in India Currently, the natural gas demand far exceeds
domestic supply in India and the situation is likely to continue in the future
The country’ production of natural gas falling and additional demand is likely
to be catered through LNG in the future or through transnational pipelines in
absence of any large domestic discoveries, leaving the country to import natural
gas as LNG from LNG exporting countries like Oman, Iran & Qatar An Indian
consortium comprising ONGC Videsh Ltd (OVL), Indian Oil Corp Ltd (IOCL) and Oil
India Ltd (OIL) won  bid for the Farsi block in 2002 from National Iranian Oil
Co (NIOC) The Farsi Block has an in-place gas reserve of Trillion Cubic Feet
(TCF) of which TCF are recoverable OVL is preparing  Master Development Plan for
the gas field Gas produced from the field can either be converted into LNG by
freezing at sub-zero temperature and shipping in cryogenic ships to India or
transported through  pipeline LNG plays  critical role in partially bridging the
gas supply gap in the country India is currently the world’ fourth-largest
importer of LNG Currently, India has the infrastructure to annually 211 of 244
import and re-gasify 25 MMTPA of LNG through the four terminals (Dahej, 10
MMTPA; Hazira,  MMTPA; Dabhol,  MMTPA; and Kochi,  MMTPA) established on the
west coast However, the actual import capacity is less than 17 MMTPA due to
lower utilisation of the Kochi and Dabhol terminals on account of pipeline
connectivity issues and incomplete marine facilities India has remained
interested in sourcing gas through cross-border pipelines from countries like
Turkmenistan, Iran and other Middle-East countries for  long time The
Turkmenistan- Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) pipeline is proposed for
transporting Caspian Sea natural gas from Turkmenistan through Afghanistan into
Pakistan and then to India India plans to import 30- 40 MMSCMD of natural gas
from Turkmenistan through this pipeline, and negotiations are under way with
Afghanistan and Pakistan over transit fee and other related matters Earlier to
TAPI pipeline, India proposed  transnational pipeline which will transport
natural gas from South Pars field in Iran via Pakistan and to India But, due to
some political and several other reasons this proposal is shelved However, India
is pursuing transnational pipelines to meet rising energy needs The country is
reliant on imports to meet about half of its natural gas needs Hence, with
support from Russian companies, India started reviewing the possibilities of
Iran-Pakistan- India offshore pipeline in Arabian Sea If this offshore pipeline
comes into reality, India will have the required supply to meet its future
demands Presently, India is importing natural gas apart from indigenous natural
gas productions in terms of LNG to meet the current market demands However, if
the aforesaid pipeline projects rule out, India has already planned to import
more LNG from LNG exporting countries There are  number of Greenfield and
Brownfield LNG projects at different stages of conceptualisation and development
on the eastern and western coasts of India Their viability and actual
development is also predicated on the emergence of  robust gas market in India,
with an appropriate policy framework to address the challenges faced by
different segments of the industry Figure 101: LNG terminals India India is
expected to have approximately 32,727 km of natural gas pipeline with  design
capacity of 815 MMSCMD in place by However, the identification of new natural
gas fields in India the 212 of 244 supply point capacity to the markets is
likely to increase to 582 MMSCMD This capacity indicates the potential of the
gas transport pipeline infrastructure to meet the demand in the country India’
gas transmission infrastructure For  country with huge population and extreme
growth in all means, the demand for Natural Gas across the nation soars every
day The nation’ MoPNG encompass its gas transmission infrastructure in terms of
Gas Pipeline Network to supply natural gas across the country India currently
operates the longest Gas Transmission Pipeline connecting three major states
(Gujarat, Karnataka & Andhra Pradesh) The gas transmission pipeline from these
states is used to transport natural gas which is being produced in the country
itself The natural gas reserve in the country is on lower side compared to the
current demand Hence, India started importing LNG form Gulf countries as well
For LNG import India operates Dahej, Gujarat and Kochi as LNG import terminals
mainly At these terminals, the LNG is re-gasified and transported via pipelines
Based on the demand for natural gas in the country, design capacity of pipeline
network in India is expected to reach 815 MMSCMD in 2029-The Gas Transmission
Pipeline network in India is being controlled by two major stake holders (GAIL –
Public Corporation and RGTIL – Private Corporation) GAIL Gas Authority of India
Limited referred as GAIL operates the country’ 70% of gas transmission market
GAIL played  key role as gas market developer in India for decades catering to
major industrial sectors like power, fertilisers, and city gas distribution GAIL
owns the country' largest pipeline network, the cross-country 2300 km Hazira-
Vijaipur-Jagdishpur pipeline with  capacity to handle MMSCMD gas Presently, the
company owns and operates  more than 11000 km long cross-country Natural Gas
Pipeline in India with presence in 22 states in the country GAIL has been given
the responsibility of construction, operation & maintenance of Jagdishpur-
Haldia/Bokaro-Dhamra Pipeline which is the extension of existing Hazira-
Vijaipur-Jagdishpur pipeline RGTIL In the recent past,  private owned Gas
Transmission Pipeline Network emerged in India to transport natural gas to the
rest of the country The private gas transport pipeline is owned and operated by
RIL (Reliance Industries Limited) in the name of RGTIL (Reliance Gas
Transportation Infrastructure Limited) RGTIL laid  gas pipeline of 1460 Kms to
transport natural gas from east coast of the country to west The pipeline is
referred as East West Pipeline (EWPL) The EWPL is currently transporting natural
gas produced in Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh at KG-D6 Block to Baurach, Gujarat This
gas transmission supports Gujarat’ power sector and Fertiliser industries RGTIL
is now planning to extend its Gas Transmission Pipeline network from Kakinada,
Andhra Pradesh (East Coast) to North-East region and Southern region of the
country The extension of 213 of 244 pipeline for these  regions will be done
with hook-up possibility in the GAIL pipeline network Since, RGTIL/RIL has
proposed LNG terminals which shall be referred as RLNG at East coast region and
newly identified definitive natural gas resource in the deep locations of East
coast Figure 102: EWPL Route Map The newly proposed pipelines are referred to as
Kakinada-Haldia pipeline (KHPL); Kakinada- Chennai pipeline (KCPL); Chennai-
Bangalore-Mangalore pipeline (CBMPL); and Chennai-Tuticorin pipeline (CTPL)
capable of carrying around 80 million metric standard cubic metres per day
(MMSCMD) of gas However, MoPNG stated that the entire natural gas produced at
KG-D6 Block will be given to the existing pipeline leaving no gas transport for
the proposed pipelines by RGTIL Hence, the MoPNG declined RGTIL’ interest on
extension of gas pipelines on basis of declining gas production at KG-D6 Block
Below table represents the list of operating gas pipelines in India (National
Gas Grid) Table 59: Operating pipelines in India Network/Region Entity Length
Design Pipeline Average % (Kms) Capacity Size flow Capacity (MMSCMD)
utilisation  Hazira- Vijaipur- GAIL 00 00 36" 16 57 Jagdishpur Pipeline /Gas
Rehabilitation & Expansion Projects pipeline/Dahej-Vijaipur Pipeline & Spur /
Vijaipur- Dadri Pipeline DVPL-GREP Upgradation GAIL 00 00 48" 26 33 (DVPL- &
VDPL) Chhainsa- Jhajjar -Hissar GAIL 00 00 36" /16" 97 34 Pipeline (CJPL) 214 of
244 (including Spur lines) commisioned up to Sultanpur, Jhajjar- Hissar under
hold (111 Km) Dahej-Uran-Panvel GAIL 00 90 30"/18" 62 41 Pipeline (DUPL/ DPPL)
including Spur Lines Dadri- Bawana- Nangal GAIL 80 00 36"/30"/24 66 03 Pipeline,
Dadri- "/18" Bawana:106Km, Bawana - Nangal:501 KM, Spur Line of BNPL : 196 Km
Dabhol -Bangaluru GAIL 00 00 36"-" 17 32 Pipeline (including spur) Kochi-
Koottanad- GAIL 00 00 16"-" 03 08 Bengaluru- Mangalore (Phase-) Assam (Lakwa)
GAIL 00 50 24" 37 80 Tripura (Agartala) GAIL 00 30 12" 44 61 Ahmedabad GAIL 00
91 12" 26 93 Rajasthan (Focus GAIL 40 35 12" 44 28 Energy) Bharuch, Vadodara
GAIL 00 42 24"/16" 08 47 (Undera) including RLNG+ RIL Mumbai GAIL 00 03 26" 31
76 KG Basin (including GAIL 00 00 18" 31 19 RLNG+ RIL) Cauvery Basin GAIL 00 66
18" 65 59 East- West Pipeline Reliance 00 00 48" 00 25 (RGTIL) Gujarat State
Petronet GSPL 00 00 Assorted 33 91 Ltd(GSPL) Network including Spur Lines Assam
Regional Network AGCL , 80 24 16" and 25 44 DNPL others Dadri -Panipat IOCL 41
50 30"/10" 34 70 Uran -Trombay ONGC 00 00 20" 80 33 Below table represents the
list of future/under construction gas pipelines in India (National Gas Grid) 215
of 244 Table 60: Planned Pipelines in India NETWORK/REGION Entity Length Design
Pipeline Size Status of in Kms Capacity Pipeline laid (MMSCMD) (Km) Kochi -
Koottanad - GAIL(India) Ltd 1063 00 24"/18"/12" 45 Bangaluru - Mangalore Dabhol
-Bengaluru GAIL(India) Ltd 315 00 36"/30"/24"/18" 27 Surat - Paradip*
GAIL(India) Ltd 2112 81 36"/24"/18"  Jagdishpur- GAIL(India) Ltd 2539 00
30”/24"/18"/12”/”/” Haldia-Bokaro- Dhamra (JHBDPL) (Phase- (755 KM), 44 MMSCMD
capacity Mallavaram - GSPC India 2042 25 42”/36"/30"/24"/18"/12”  Bhilwada*
Transco Ltd Mehsana - GSPC India 2052 11 36”/24”/18”/12”  Bhatinda * Gasnet Ltd
Bhatinda - GSPC India 725 42 24”/18”/16”/12”/”/”  Srinagar* Gasnet Ltd Kakinada
-Vizag-   Gas 391 00 24”/18  Srikakulam * Distribution Corporation Shadol-
Phulpur * Reliance Gas 312 50 16” 304 Pipelines Ltd Ennore- Nellore* Gas 250 00
24”/18”  Transmission India Pvt Ltd Ennore- Indian Oil 1385 67
28"/24”/16”/12"/10"  Thiruvallur- Corporation Ltd Bengaluru- Puducherry-
Nagapattinam- Madurai-Tuticorin* Jaigarh-Manglore* -Energy Pvt 635 00 24"  Ltd
Natural gas demand in east India The Government of India (GoI) announced  new
agenda  Power for All (PFA) jointly with every State Government in India The aim
is to achieve 24X7 availability of reliable power to all 216 of 244 households,
industrial, commercial and all other electricity consuming entities Due to raise
in Global Warming awareness and other environmental impact, GoI has planned to
produce electricity by Natural Gas and Solar energy Hence, the demand for
greener fuel is escalated in all parts of the country Particularly, West Bengal
located in the eastern region of the country is considered as the largest
consumer of energy Hence, to provide the need for energy, MoPNG has given GAIL
the responsibility of natural gas transmission to the eastern part of the
country Though the eastern region of the country is identified with abundant
resource of natural gas, the demand is still on the higher side The lack in
supply can be fulfilled by JHPL which is estimated/expected to transport the
required demand by the region Figure 103 represents the Gas Transmission Grid in
India to meet the supply demand graph for current and future natural gas
requirement Figure 103: Gas Transmission Network in India (Existing & Future)
217 of 244 APPENDIX : PIPELINE INPUT DATA Table 61: Pipeline input data Pipe
Length Inside Wall Thickness in 406 Roughness Diameter in 188 Units BB-18km20in
km 18 in 001 -15km 14in 11 376 312 001 NS0-FPS 15km24in 15 188 406 001 FPS-FG
5km24in  188 406 001 FG-RG 73km24in 73 188 406 001 RG-2km20in  188 406 001
MB-25km14in 22 376 312 001 FG-5km10in  25 25 001 J1-28km24in 28 188 406 001
HG-1km12in  25 25 001 J2-41km24in 41 188 406 001 J3-13km24in 13 188 406 001
L5-J2 5km12in  25 25 001 L3-L5 5km12in  25 25 001 FPS-5km12in  25 001 3Km 24in
188 406 001 ->M4k-24i  188 406 001 - 33k 24in 33 188 406 001 Pipe0002  25 25 001
Pipe0002-  19  001 GGF->V12 49k-17 92 312 344 001 GGF->V12 32k 39 312 344 001
V11-V12 278k 618 376 312 001 MHRD-NSD 25 188 406 001 V12->GSL old 14in12k 12 376
312 001 V12->GSL old 14- 12 376 312 001 GSL->JDP 24k 24 376 312 001 Mh'di-'nua
36k 36 188 406 001 Dh'na->Elenga 52k 52 188 406 001 'ga-EBJB 5k 188 406 001 JB
9K  874 563 001 Nl'ka->Baghabari 35k 35 312 344 001 Pipe0001 41 316 312 001
Pipe0002-  188 406 001 Pipe0002-  188 406 001 218 of 244 Pipe0002- 30 188 406
001 Pipe0002-  188 406 001 - line- 874 563 001 Bangora  25 25 001 Pipe0004- 56
25 25 001 Pipe0004 43 25 25 001 J3-13km30in- 13 874 563 001 Pipe0007 48 874  001
BKB->'Ria 49k 36 188 406 001 BKB->'Ria 49k-  188 406 001 BKB->'Ria 49k-  188 406
001 BKB->'Ria 49k-  188 406 001 Pipe0001- 58 316 312 001 BKB->'Ria 49k-  188 406
001 GGF->V12 32k- 12 312 344 001 MHRD-NSD- 47 188 406 001 MHRD-NSD- 13 188 406
001 20in54km 54 188 406 001 30in6km  874 563 001 24in10km_ii 10 188 406 001
24in5Km  188 406 001 8in-5k  625  001 Pipe0002-  25 25 001 Pipe0001-  316 312
001 Pipe0002-  188 406 001 Pipe0001- 005 316 312 001 Pipe0008  25 25 001
HG-1km12in-  25 001 BKB->'Ria 49k- 13 188 406 001 L5-J2 5km12in-  25 25 001
-15km 14in-  376 312 001 L3-L5 5km12in- 40 06 25 001 L3-L5 5km12in- 12 06 25 001
Pipe0010 25 005  001 Ghatura-V11- 13 376 312 001 Ghatura-V11- 772 376 312 001
12in53km 53 63 311 001 30in43km 44 874 563 001 30in34km 30 874 563 001 30in7km
874 563 001 219 of 244 Pipe0008-  188 563 001 - line 10 874 563 001 - line- 29
874 563 001 - line-  874 563 001 20in46km 46 188 406 001 20in17km 17 188 406 001
20in27km 27 188 406 001 20in22km 22 188 406 001 'da->bkb 35k 35 25 25 001
Pipe0009 28  25 001 Pipe0011 36 874 563 001 J3-13km30in- 37 874 563 001 MHRD-
NSD- 25 188 406 001 'ga-EBJB 5k- 874 563 001 Pipe0014  75  001 J3-13km30in- 41
874 563 001 J3-13km30in- 28 874 563 001  37 874 563 001 - 10 874 563 001 -  874
563 001 -  874 563 001 - line- 60 874 563 001 BD- 100 624 688 001 BD- 37 624 688
001 -  874 563 001 20in27km- 51 874 563 001 'ga-EBJB 5k- 52 874 563 001 -- 40 75
625 001 KR 30 496 752 001 -- 75 625 001 -- 40 496 752 001 -- 40 496 752 001 CB1
75 622 688 001 CB1- 90 622 688 001 CB1- 15 622 688 001 - 45 874 563 001 JB 9K-
874 563 001 36x140km 140 624 688 001 30inx45km 45 874 563 001 36inx70km 70 624
563 001 220 of 244 APPENDIX : LESSONS LEARNED FROM GAS REGULATION IN OTHER
COUNTRIES This appendix reviews lessons learned from gas regulation in other
countries with an expanding natural gas sector with participation from
international oil and gas companies, and who are considering importing (more)
gas, have high population density, and strong economic growth The countries
whose gas sector the Consultant draws lessons from for the Update are India,
Pakistan and Vietnam Case study : Pakistan Background13 Like Bangladesh,
Pakistan projects  strong increase in gas demand over the next decades, and
domestic gas production is expected to decline if no new discoveries are made In
2015, the gas deficit was around 20 bcm (2000 MMCFD/) and it is expected to
triple Several import projects are planned to fill the gap In this respect, it
is very similar to Bangladesh The upstream gas sector consists of Government-
controlled companies like the Oil and Gas Development Company Limited, OGDCL and
Pakistan Petroleum Limited, PPL, local private companies and IOCs The private
companies produce around 50% of Pakistan’ gas output, OGDCL 28%, and PPL around
20% Two partially Government-owned gas utilities; Sui Northern Gas Pipeline Ltd
(SNGPL) and Sui Southern Gas Company Ltd (SSGC), engage in the purchase,
transmission, distribution, and supply of natural gas in Pakistan They operate
and maintain high-pressure gas transmission and distribution systems in their
respective territories in the Northern and Southern provinces In addition,
independent pipeline systems supply gas to power and fertiliser plants These are
also owned partially by the government through OGDCL and Mari Gas Company Ltd
Petroleum policies The Government of Pakistan has issued Petroleum policies
since 1991 and revised them on  regular basis The latest is from It aims at
attracting both local and foreign private sector investments in the Pakistani
oil and gas sector It determines the licensing process based on three onshore
and one offshore Zones and provides four types of licenses The system is based
on Petroleum Concession Agreements in the onshore zones, and Production sharing
contracts for the offshore zone Gas exports is subject to the “L15” concept: Gas
reserves that exceed the net proven gas reserves, including firm import
commitments, vis--vis the projected gas demand, can be exported Given the
current gas deficit, exports are hypothetical 13 OIES: Natural Gas in Pakistan
and Bangladesh Current issues and Trends Ieda Gomes 221 of 244 The & companies
operating in Pakistan can sell their share of the gas to SNGPL, SNGC or to other
transmission and distribution companies and to third parties (other than
residential and commercial customers) at negotiated prices Alternatively, &
companies can request the Government to purchase 90% of their share of gas
through  nominated buyer They also have the right to sell 10% of their share of
the gas to any buyer (with the consent of the Provincial Government) The
Petroleum Policy and decisions by OGRA (the downstream regular, see below) allow
for third party access to existing transmission and distribution pipelines After
an exclusivity period for SNGPL and SNGC to supply gas to their existing
customers (which lasted until 2012), large consumers, such as industry and
power, could in principle be supplied directly by gas producers through third
party use of SNGPL or SSGC network up to  certain portion of their production
However, this has not worked in practice Gas Pricing The price to producers for
Associated or Non Associated Gas is linked to  basket of crude oil import in
Pakistan The Petroleum Policy determines  floor of $10/barrel of oil
corresponding to  gas price of $75 per MMBtu, and applies  sliding scale up to
ceiling for the oil price of $110, resulting in  max price of $  per MMBtu in
Zone III, $  per MMBtu in Zone , and $ per MMBtu Offshore (Deep) and $ per MMBtu
(UltraDeep) OGRA advises GOP on the price of gas for each retail consumer
category, and MPNR notifies end- user tariffs for various tariff categories
based on OGRA’ determinations Upstream regulation The Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Resources (MPNR) serves multiple roles in the sector, including policy-
making, allocation of gas to various consumers, and regulation of upstream
petroleum activity MPNR also has  role in the setting of wellhead prices The
Government Holding (Private) Limited (GHPL) manages the Government' ownership
interest in petroleum exploration and production joint ventures GHPL is also
Licensee of the Government for Offshore petroleum exploration and production
operation MPNR’ mission statement14 is to ensure availability and security of
sustainable supply of oil and gas for economic development and strategic
requirements of Pakistan and to coordinate the development of natural resources
of energy and minerals The MPNR is responsible for dealing with all matters
relating to petroleum, gas and mineral affairs Its detailed functions are: 
Policy, legislation, planning regarding exploration, development and productions
policy guidelines to regulatory bodies in oil and gas sectors; 14  222 of 244 
Policy guidelines and facilitation of import, export, refining, distribution,
marketing, transportation and pricing of all kinds of petroleum and petroleum
products;  Matters bearing on international aspects;  Federal agencies and
institutions for promotion of special studies and development programmes; 
Facilitate the development of petroleum and mineral sectors;  Attract the
private investment The upstream oil and gas activities are regulated by the
Directorate General of Petroleum and Concessions (DGPC), which is situated in
MPNR’ Policy Wing as one of five directorates The other directorates are Oil,
Gas, Special projects (LNG), and Administration DGPC functions are to:  Grant
petroleum rights,  reconnaissance permits, exploration licenses, development and
production leases;  Facilitate exploration & production and services
companies/activities;  Analyse Oil and Gas fiscal regimes and recommend
adequate policies in view of international practices;  Promote petroleum
exploration, negotiations with foreign and local petroleum exploration
companies;  Manage petroleum exploration, development and production operations
in accordance with good international oil field practices, applicable rules and
Petroleum Concession;  Ensure realisation of the Government receipts (dividend,
royalty, rents, application fees etc);  Compile investment data and manage and
scale technical data Downstream regulation The Oil and Gas Regulatory Authority
(OGRA) regulates midstream and downstream activities of the oil and gas sector
OGRA was formed in 2002 to foster competition, increase private investments and
ownership in the midstream and downstream petroleum industry and protect public
interest OGRA is independent from MPNR and the government-controlled companies,
and is situated in the Government’ Cabinet Division In the gas sector, OGRA
regulates gas transmission and distribution, and Liquefied Petroleum gas (LPG)
and Compressed Natural Gas (CNG), and determines revenue requirement for
transmission and distribution companies (including allowed Unaccounted-For Gas,
or UFG) LNG Pakistan began importing spot cargoes of LNG in January Cargoes were
delivered to the 151,000 cob FSRU provided by Excelerate Energy The FSRU is
operated by Engro Elengy and was Pakistan’ first import terminal at the Port
Qasim, Karachi and has  690 MMCFD send-out capacity 223 of 244 In February 2016,
Pakistan signed its first long-term LNG contract with Qatar Qatargas will supply
fuel to state-owned Pakistan State Oil (PSO) from 2016 to The price for each LNG
cargo in  particular month has been agreed at 37% of Brent where Brent value is
average of the preceding three months Qatargas will supply 75mn MT/yr of LNG to
PSO In October 2016, Qatargas and Pakistan’ Global Energy Infrastructure (GEIL)
signed  20-year LNG deal According to the contract, Qatargas will supply 3mn
MT/yr of LNG to Pakistan for 20 years, with provisions allowing the volume to
increase to 3mn MT/yr The price is confidential The LNG will be supplied from
Qatargas  with the first cargo expected to be delivered to Pakistan in 2018 by
Qatargas-chartered -Flex vessels GEIL signed  long-term contract with Höegh LNG
for  FSRU in Port Qasim in December The project is the first private LNG import
terminal in Pakistan Options for  more competitive gas industry The Government
of Pakistan has been assessing the performance of Pakistan’ natural gas sector
and developed options for the future direction of the sector towards
competitive and deregulated sector with increased private sector participation
This would among other things involve overcoming the current barriers to selling
directly to customers at prices that are higher than today and at the same time
fully cover costs, including future gas supply and LNG imports To remove
barriers to competition, the separation of trading and infrastructure operations
and transmission and distribution are being discussed  key issue to decide is
the timing of the revisions to the regulatory framework, the restructuring of
the gas sector and the price increases to cover the higher costs of future gas
supplies In general, options include:  Establish two markets for gas: The
current low-priced gas supplied by SNGPL and SSGC to their customers at
regulated prices and  market for new gas supply at (higher) deregulated prices 
How to introduce LNG imports? As  private sector import at unregulated prices
sold to customers willing to pay the price? Or introducing regulation of the
price for LNG? Introduce  single buyer in the form of  transmission company 
Provincial ownership An Amendment to the Constitution in 2010 changed the
ownership of oil and natural gas in Pakistan In particular Article 172() vests
oil and natural gas resources jointly and equally between the Federal Government
and the oil and gas provinces Article 158 gives each province precedence over
gas produced in its territory Article 154 enshrines the provinces’ role in the
Council of Common Interest (CCI) Lessons for Bangladesh Separate Regulation from
policy function and operations 224 of 244 BERC regulates the downstream gas
sector in Bangladesh and is empowered to apply the provisions of the Gas Act It
is situated within the ministry The downstream regulator, OGRA in Pakistan is
independent from the Ministry, MPNR and the government-controlled companies, and
is situated in the Government’ Cabinet Division The regulation of the upstream
sector is different in the two countries; The upstream oil and gas activities in
Pakistan are regulated by the Directorate General of Petroleum and Natural
resources (DGPC), situated in Ministry’ Policy Wing The Government' ownership
interest in petroleum exploration and production joint ventures is managed by
private Government Holding company In Bangladesh, Petrobangla has  role as the
upstream regulator, supervising and monitoring the PSCs At the same time,
petrobangla is the counterpart to the contracts which can pose potential
conflicts of interests The Government has authorised Petrobangla to enter into
agreements with international oil companies on behalf of the Government
Pakistan’ upstream regulatory system is cleaner than that of Bangladesh;
however, an independent agency would be even better placed to avoid potential
conflicts of interest Examples of countries with more independent upstream
regulators are Canada and Norway Petroleum policies The Government of Pakistan
revises the Petroleum policies on  regularly basis to keep them up to date with
development Bangladesh issued  Petroleum policy in Provincial ownership of
resources In Bangladesh, the Government has the ownership of the oil and gas
resources In Pakistan, oil and natural gas resources are owned jointly and
equally between the Federal Government and the Provinces The upstream regulator
in Pakistan is under consideration to be re-organised The first step of the
reform is to separate the regulatory and the policy roles, and investigate how
to integrate the Provinces in policy and regulation This must be further
advanced before  conclusion can be drawn about the impact and results on
regulation LNG Imports Pakistan has started importing LNG through  state-owned
company and soon LNG will be imported by  private company as well The costs of
these imports are higher than the cost of indigenous gas production Bangladesh
should start  discussion on how to price the future higher LNG costs and which
customers are going to pay the higher price Case study : Vietnam Background The
gas industry started in 1994 with the production of associated gas from the Bach
Ho oilfields in the Cuu Long Basin in the South-East offshore continental shelf
This was followed in 2003 when the first non-associated gas field came on stream
in the Nam Con Son basin also in the South-East offshore, followed by other
blocks in the same basin 2007 saw the first deliveries of 225 of 244 gas from
the PM- development in the Malay-Tho Chu in the Phu Khanh in the South West
offshore area, jointly administered with Malaysia, and more recently gas
production began in the Song Hong basin in Northern offshore This production is
expected to increase gradually The largest gas discovery in Vietnam, Blue Whale
in the Central offshore is expected to come on stream around Other fields in the
South West are under negotiation to be developed Figure 104: Oil and Gas Basins
in Vietnam The three gas producing areas are not connected by pipelines In each
case, the projects have been developed on  project-by-project basis to supply
gas to power projects and in some cases fertiliser production as well Very
little gas is consumed by the industry In 2016, Vietnam produced bcm of natural
gas15 Around 80% of the gas is consumed in power generation, 11% in fertiliser
production and % in industries Gas accounts for around 15% of Vietnam’ energy
matrix Around one third of the country’ power is generated with gas and around
three quarters of the fertiliser production There is very little commercial and
residential consumption of natural gas in Vietnam 15 BP Statistical Review of
World Energy, 2017 226 of 244 Gas production has been around 10 bcm since 2013
as production in old fields is declining New fields are coming on stream
replacing these fields and investments in infrastructure are overcoming
bottlenecks, such as the capacity of the Nam Con Son pipeline Gas Master Plan In
January 2017, the Prime Ministry approved the Master Plan for Vietnam Gas
Industry Development to 2025 with an outlook up to The goal is to achieve  gas
production of 13- 19 billion cubic metres per year by 2025 and  bcm of LNG
imports, and  production of  bcm and up to 10 bcm of LNG imports by On the
demand side, the plan will continuously develop the gas-fired power plants which
should use about 70 – 80% of total production (including imports of LNG);
develop an oil and gas based petrochemical sector, strengthen investment in
natural gas processing; develop domestic industrial production; continuously
sustain and extend gas distribution with an aim to protect environment and
increase the value of gas use; at the same time develop low pressure and
compressed natural gas distribution systems PetroVietnam Vietnam Oil and Gas
Corporation (Petrovietnam) is delegated by the government to carry out petroleum
exploitation and exploration and signing oil and gas contracts It also
cooperates with international partners in either Production Sharing Contracts
(PSCs) or joint ventures for upstream operations and approve and supervise work
programs of PSCs In practice, PetroVietnam self-regulates Under authority of the
Prime Minister, Petrovietnam has the sole rights to buy gas offshore and to sell
gas to end users PetroVietnam’ subsidiary Petro Vietnam Gas Corporation (PV Gas)
is responsible for the midstream and retail gas activities in Viet Nam PV Gas
has sole rights to distribution network development and sells gas to the state-
owned power utility, Electricity Vietnam (EVN), to IPPs, and is also
increasingly participating in downstream consumption of gas, including power
generation facilities through its ownership of the Ca Mau power plant in the
South West receiving gas from gas from PM-, and at the Nhon Trach power complex
receiving gas from Nam Con Son, and in fertiliser production as well Gas pricing
Gas pricing issues are dealt with project-by-project, rather than generically
Each project has been negotiated in its own rights with the IOC holding the
license/PSC in terms of the volume, build up period, price and which customers
to serve For instance, for the first non-associated gas project, the pricing was
negotiated by Petrovietnam with  consortium led by BP (which included
Petrovietnam stake) to supply gas from the Lan Tay and Lan Do fields in the Nam
Con Son basin to the power complex at Phu My outside Hi Chi Minh City With the
addition of gas supply from additional fields in the Nam Con Son Basin and new
power plants, including two IPPs, the total capacity reached ,800 MW, and gas is
also consumed in fertiliser plants at Phu My 16 Vietnam Energy Online, Jan 20,
227 of 244 The price for gas delivered at Phu My was agreed at around USD  per
mmbtu with an indexation of %  when gas started flowing in This was higher than
the price of the associated gas from Bach Ho, but still low by international
standards setting an expectation of low gas prices for later developments This
expectation has delayed new field development as higher development and
production costs have not been recognised and alternative fuel pricing, linking
the gas price to the fuels it would substitute, coal, LNG, petroleum products,
has not been considered Legal Framework The Legal framework is summarised in Box
No  There is no independent gas regulator The ministry is responsible for the
state management of petroleum activities PetroVietnam is responsible for
technical regulation and self regulates (see previous section) Box No  Legal and
regulatory framework for the oil and gas sector in Vietnam National Assembly -
Approve Petroleum Law and related laws - Approve projects of national importance
Government & Prime Minister - Approve National Strategy, Master Plans - Approve
category  projects, petroleum contracts, oil & gas fields reserves and
development plans - Issue Directives on gas prices and gas allocations - Approve
cooperation contracts in overlap areas and oversea contracts - Approve
PetroVietnam Group’ organisation & charter, nomination of key staff Ministry of
Industry and Trade - Responsible to Government for state management of petroleum
activities, assisted by the General Directorate of Energy (GDE) - Strategies,
master plans, plans for petroleum industry development - Coordination of
submissions to Prime Minister for approval: petroleum contracts; investment
projects; reserves reports; field development plans; bidding results relating to
concession blocks - Prepare and submit approval blocks list to Prime Minister -
Monitor petroleum activities, report on progress - Approve programs, and full
range of activities from project initiation to decommissioning SOURCE: ESMAP:
VIETNAM GAS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK FINAL REPORT NO 52865-VN How to meet
the objectives of the Gas Master Plan and LNG imports The objectives in the Gas
Master Plan will be met in each of the four gas producing regions as follows:
228 of 244 Northern region: Find solutions for the collection of gas from the
dispersed small fields with an aim to  strengthen gas supply ability for
industrial customers in the region  Study and invest in infrastructure for LNG
imports to supply industrial customers and power plants, according to the Power
Master Plan Central region:  Develop infrastructure to collect, transport and
handle gas from Blue Whale field for supplying gas-fired power plants according
to the Power Master Plan;  Develop petrochemical industry based on Blue Whale
gas  Develop low pressure gas distribution system, and small-scale CNG/LNG for
supplying industrial customers in the region Southeast region:  Strengthen
exploration and field development to maintain gas supply in the region Invest in
infrastructure for LNG imports to supplement the depletion of domestic gas 
production  Supply power plants according to the Power Master Plan Southwest
region: Improve infrastructure to collect and transport gas  Invest in
infrastructure for LNG imports to sustain gas supply for customers and develop 
new power plants using LNG Options for  more competitive gas industry The lack
of physical interconnection between the regional gas markets and the limits on
the size of the markets are barriers for gas trade in Vietnam The legal and
regulatory framework described in Box no  and Petrovietnam’ role in the gas
sector does not support  development towards  competitive gas market
Petrovietnam is self-regulating and negotiates prices on  project by project
basis, and PV Gas has the sole right to distribution network and sales to EVN
and IPPs There is no separation of policy making from economic regulation and no
independent body responsible for economic regulation The GMP projects an
introduction of LNG in all four regions, probably in around five years
International LNG prices are higher than current gas prices in Vietnam and the
start of the LNG imports could be  first step towards market based pricing
However, LNG is likely to be introduced before any market reforms which implies
that Petrovietnam will import LNG and PV Gas will transport it, giving rise to
number of questions:  Would LNG be integrated as an additional supply source or
standalone supply option? Is it priced separately so that dual markets are
established? And how would that impact  the demand? 229 of 244 Conclusion Gas
development in Vietnam has been delayed by the lack of  gas pricing policy and
market for gas By negotiating projects and prices on  case by case basis, the
industry has difficulty evaluating the financial returns on oil and gas
production from prospective fields, and the government has difficulty deciding
on an efficient development for energy resources and optimising the petroleum
fiscal system to provide the right incentives and fiscal revenues The three
(soon four) regional gas markets in Vietnam are not connected by pipelines,
which is not desirable from  supply security perspective and for the creation of
functioning gas market Most of the gas is consumed by the power sector whose
power transmission network connects the gas producing regions The shortage of
natural gas in Vietnam can be explained by the “circle of unsustainability” The
Gas Shortage shown at the top in the left panel in Figure 105 is due to
insufficient investment in domestic exploration and lack of clarity and slow
decision-taking on the price for gas in new developments This leads to fewer
investments in gas fired power generation and potential shortage of power This
is the “circle of unsustainability” If clear pricing signal and market
mechanisms for gas are introduced, investments in exploration and production
will increase gas supply and more gas can be sold to the power sector increasing
the power supply to fuel Vietnam’ large demand for power This is the “circle of
sustainability” Figure 105: Circle of Sustainability SOURCE: ESMAP: VIETNAM GAS
SECTOR DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK FINAL REPORT NO 52865-VN 230 of 244 Lessons for
Bangladesh Develop an appropriate gas pricing policy The development of  gas
pricing policy that meets the interests of the government, industry and
consumers, sends clear pricing signals and is  step in the direction of
developing  market for gas which will get Bangladesh into the “Circle of
Sustainability” Reconsider the role of the SOE Like Bangladesh, Vietnam has
dominant state-owned oil and gas company delegated by the government to carry
out petroleum exploitation and exploration, signing oil and gas contracts and
supervising IOCs operating in the sector Its subsidiary, PV Gas, links gas from
the upstream gas supplies to the end-users and has the sole rights to
distribution pipeline development This model can benefit the sector in the early
stages of oil and gas development but also delay later developments due to
potential conflicts of interest, self-regulation, and lack of independent
regulation Determine an LNG pricing policy Vietnam is planning to import LNG The
costs of these imports will be higher than the cost of indigenous gas production
Bangladesh should start  discussion of how to price the future higher LNG costs
and which customers are going to pay the higher price Case study  India
Background In 2015, India produced bcm of natural gas and consumed bcm The
difference is LNG imports of bcm, bcm of which was imported from Qatar
Currently, the majority of gas is produced in the western offshore region and
almost all of it comes from conventional hydrocarbon sources Gas production is
set to rise in the next four to five years as western and eastern offshore
discoveries are brought into production Chapter  described the main public and
private companies in the sector, the main transmission pipelines and demand
centres, including planned projects and projections This section will focus on
the policy and the legal and regulatory framework in the gas sector in India All
minerals in India are owned by the state which holds exclusive authority to mine
India has  quasi-federal constitution where both the federal and the state
governments have legislative powers However, under the Indian constitution, only
the federal government is empowered to make laws relating to regulation and
development of oil and gas Offshore licenses are granted by the federal
government Onshore leases are granted by the state government with prior
approval from the federal government 231 of 244 Legal Framework Exercising its
constitutional powers, the government passed the Oilfields (Regulation and
Development) in Act 1948 and the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules in Together,
they regulate the grant of petroleum mining leases and provide the provisions
for regulating petroleum operations and granting licenses and leases for
exploration, development and production of petroleum in India From time to time,
the government formulates policies under which concessions for exploration of
oil and gas are awarded through  transparent competitive bidding system to
private/foreign investors and national oil companies (NOCs) on the same fiscal
and contractual terms17 The Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of
Right of User in Land) Act 1962 provides the framework for acquiring rights to
lay pipelines for transporting petroleum, minerals and other connected
substances Government policies The Government formulated  policy called New
Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) in The main objective was to attract
significant risk capital from Indian and foreign companies, state of art
technologies, new geological concepts and best management practices to explore
oil and gas resources in the country to meet rising demands of oil and gas Since
then, licenses for exploration have been awarded only through  competitive
bidding system and NOCs are required to compete on an equal footing with Indian
and foreign companies to secure Petroleum Exploration Licenses Nine rounds of
bids were concluded under NELP, in which production sharing contracts (PSCs) for
254 exploration blocks were signed18 The Integrated Energy Policy was developed
by an expert panel of Planning Commission and adopted by the government in The
policy seeks optimal exploitation of domestic energy resources and also vigorous
exploration and acquisition of energy assets abroad, so that energy security can
be attained effectively The broad vision behind this policy was to create
regime to reduce dependence on imports and reliably meet energy demands with
safe, clean and convenient energy at minimum cost 19 More recently, India
announced  new Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) to correct
various issues that had arisen in NELP These included separate policies and
licenses for different hydrocarbons New unconventional hydrocarbons (shale gas
and shale oil) have entered the market NELP was based on PSCs that have some
well-known advantages and disadvantages While the contractor takes the
exploration risk, the Government pays the contractor costs back in the form of
cost of oil or gas, which in most cases implies that the profit sharing of the
oil and gas produced comes after the cost recovery of the contractor’
investments is completed 17 Oil and gas regulation in India: overview by
Vebkatesh Raman Prasad and Abhishek Kumar Singh 18  New Exploration Licensing
Policy (NELP) 19 Oil and gas regulation in India: overview by Vebkatesh Raman
Prasad and Abhishek Kumar Singh 232 of 244 (depending on how much cost oil or
gas that can be deducted each year) The process of approval of the contractor’
activities and their cost is  major source of delays and disputes between the
government and the contractor in many countries Another feature of NELP was the
bidding system: exploration was confined to blocks that have been put on tender
by the Government20 As for pricing under NELP, the producer price of gas was
fixed administratively by the Government and royalties were uniform They did not
distinguish between shallow water fields and deep/ultra-deep water fields where
risks and costs are much higher The HELP introduces:   single license to
explore conventional and unconventional oil and gas resources  uniform system
covering all hydrocarbons (such as oil, gas, coal-bed methane, shale gas/oil,
tight gas and gas hydrates)  Marketing and pricing freedom Departing from
earlier policies, the HELP introduces marketing and pricing freedom The
contractor will have freedom for pricing and marketing of gas produced in the
domestic market (see gas pricing below)   Revenue sharing model Production
sharing contracts are replaced by Revenue sharing contracts that will be
simpler, easier to administer and provide operational freedom,  the contractor
does not recover any costs directly, but retains  larger share of the revenue
stream to cover the cost  An Open Acreage licensing policy Contractors can
select exploration blocks throughout the year without waiting for the formal
bidding round from the government   concessional royalty regime will be
implemented for deep water (%) and ultra-deep water (%) areas In shallow water
areas, the royalty rates shall be reduced from 10% to % Apart from HELP, the
government also adopted the Marginal Field Policy in 2015 to bring marginal
fields belonging to national oil companies (which have not been monetised to
production as soon as possible The first round of auctions for discovered small
and marginal fields (67 fields in 46 contract areas) took place in The
government used  revenue-based contract to auction its marginal fields HELP also
set up  central repository for & data, the National Data Repository for ease of
access to existing data, for sharing and secure storage of data Regulation
Upstream The Upstream Regulator, Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), was
established in 1993 under the administrative control of Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas through Government of 20  233 of 244 India Resolution The
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas manages and oversees upstream oil and
natural gas exploration and production21 The DGH is the technical arm of the
ministry and acts as  regulatory body having oversight on all concessions
relating to oil and gas, including coal bed methane, shale gas etc Objectives of
DGH are to promote sound management of the oil and natural gas resources having
balanced regard for environment, safety, technological and economic aspects of
the petroleum activity Most of the manpower requirement of DGH is provided by
the NOCs (ONGC, Oil India Limited, Indian Oil Corp Ltd, Hindustan Petroleum
Corporation Ltd, Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd and GAIL (Gas Authority of
India Ltd) Downstream The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB)
regulates the midstream and downstream sector It is an independent regulator
constituted under the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act The PNGRB’
objective is to protect the interests of consumers and entities engaged in
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas activities and to promote
competitive markets Pipeline regulation Permission to construct and operate both
oil and gas pipelines is granted after  bidding process by the PNGRB under its
regulations The tariff for transporting oil and natural gas is determined by the
PNGRB (Determination of Natural Gas Pipeline tariff) Regulations Third Party
Access Third party access to pipelines and other infrastructure is permitted The
regulations provide  contract carrier system and  common carrier system to make
excess capacity available for transporting natural gas or petroleum products
through the pipelines The period of use covers one year and the parties are free
to agree their own terms within the confines of the law The company laying,
building, operating or expanding  common carrier or contract carrier pipeline
has the right of first use for its own purposes The common carrier capacity is
allocated to any company seeking it on  "first come first served" basis Gas
pricing In 2014, the Indian government issued Gas Pricing Guidelines22 The
Guidelines contain the following key features: The wellhead gas price is
determined in USD per MMbtu based on  formula that includes  annual average of
daily prices at Henry Hub in the USA, the National Balancing Point in the UK,
annual average of monthly prices at Alberta Hub in Canada, and Russia (Federal
21  22 New Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 234 of 244 Tariff) less the
transportation and treatment charges (estimated at USD 50/MMBTU) It is reviewed
and updated by the government every six months  For the North-East region, the
government is to provide 40% subsidy on the price of  gas  With the new price
guidelines there is no distinction between the previous Administered Pricing
Mechanism (APM) and non-APM, and the price notified by the government under the
policy is applicable to all gas produced in India (conventional, shale, or coal-
bed methane), except in the following circumstances where:  prices have been
fixed contractually for  certain period of time; the PSC provides for  specific
formula to index or fix the price of natural gas;  the PSC pertaining to the
regime prior to the NELP does not provide for  government approval of formulae
or the basis for gas prices;  natural gas is produced from small or isolated
fields in the nomination blocks of NOCs;  gas is produced in the Krishna
Godavari field (KG-D6) Since the gas pricing guidelines were issued there has
been  shift in the government' policy on gas pricing towards more flexibility in
the recent policy initiatives The HELP policy introduced pricing and marketing
flexibility for gas in the domestic market The Marginal Field Policy 2015 helped
marginal fields and producers can charge  higher price for gas from discoveries
in deep water/ultra-deep water/high temperature-high pressure areas The latest
price revision for the April-September 2017 period based on prices in
international gas hubs set the wellhead price at USD 48 per MMbtu, and the
ceiling for gas from difficult fields such as those in deep sea and high-
pressure high-temperature areas, which is linked to alternative fuels, was set
at USD 56/MMbtu23 Since the introduction in 2014, the wellhead gas price has
dropped more than 50% due to the decline in international gas prices Domestic
wellhead gas prices have fallen below the average cost of production for many
companies, such as ONGC and Oil India Limited, which have an average cost of
production of USD 59 per MMBtu and USD 06 per MMBtu24 Under the new price
regime, there is no clear guideline on the end-user price mechanism When the gas
pricing guidelines were issued in 2014, they resulted in an increase in the
wellhead price which raised the issue of pass-through of gas costs to consumers
The more than 50% decline since then has helped resolve this issue Imported LNG
prices are market-based India has renegotiated contracts with Qatar since the
oil and gas prices started falling in 2014 and the average import price is
estimated to USD 23 =text&utm_campaign=cppst 24 Oil and Gas Financial Journal:
Gas pricing in India Dec 14 235 of 244 61/MMBtu in May 201725 Lessons for
Bangladesh Separate Regulation from policy function and operations In India, the
Upstream Regulator, DGH is the technical arm of the ministry and acts as
regulatory body having oversight on all concessions relating to oil and gas to
avoid potential conflicts of interest between the NOCs and IOCs Petroleum
policies The Government of India issues policies on  regular basis, New
Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) in 1997, the Integrated Energy Policy 2008,
and Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) in 2017 to adjust to the
country’ needs, to international markets and developments and to attract
international investors Bangladesh issued  Petroleum policy 1993 that has not
been updated since Gas Pricing The Government of India has linked domestic
wellhead gas prices to international gas prices to attract international
investors, and LNG is imported prices at international prices and passed through
to the customers 25 FERC: National Natural Gas Market Overview: World LNG Landed
Prices, May 236 of 244 APPENDIX : KEY PETROLLEUM FISCAL TERMS FOR PRODUCTION
SHARING CONTRACTS IN MYANMAR Three types of PSCs are awarded; onshore blocks,
shallow water offshore blocks, and deep water offshore blocks Deep Water
Offshore: The exploration period is for three years and requires seismic in the
first year, one well drilled in year  and in year  It can be extended one year
two times The production period is 20 years, signature bonus and data fee
payable with 30 days of the contract signing Royalty is % of available petroleum
Cost recovery 50%-70% from  feet water depth Domestic Market Obligation 25% of
natural gas of contractor’ share (at 90% of fair market value) State
participation up to 20 % (25% if reserves are greater than  Tcf), income tax 25%
( years tax holiday), 25% local content If  significant discovery is made, the
contractor submits an appraisal work program for approval If commerciality of
the field is determined, the contractor can go ahead on the terms in the PSC,
although  renegotiation clause opens the possibility for renegotiation of the
fiscal terms The production split for gas is  sliding scale depending on water
depth and gas production In waters less than 2000 feet, the contractor receives
35% up to 300 MMcf/, 10% over 900 MMcf/ Over 2000 feet, the contractor receives
45% up to 300 MMcf/, 20% over 900 MMcf/ 237 of 244 APPENDIX : BERC LICENSE
REGULATIONS AND FUNDING License Regulations BERC’ License Regulations from 2006
determine rules for obtaining licenses for gas distribution, transmission and
storage (as well as rules for power generation and distribution of electricity
and petroleum products) BERC evaluates applications based on () technical,
administrative, and financial competencies in operating controlled activities of
the applicant; () capability of sources of energy supply; () impact on
transmission, transport, storage and distribution of existing facilities by the
proposed project; () technical details of proposed production, transmission,
transport, storage, distribution and other relevant facilities; () estimated
demand of proposed energy production, transmission, transport, storage,
distribution or sales; () justification of the project: () capital and financial
expenditure of the project; (ii) avoidance of duplication with other energy
systems; and (iii) evaluation of economies of scale General responsibilities and
duties of licensee include: () comply with all applicable laws, rules for which
the license is granted; () supply the energy with quality specified from time to
time by the commission; () abstain from discriminatory behaviour or partiality
to any consumer or energy producer; () provide energy transmission, transport,
storage, distribution services or sales to all eligibility individuals; ()
strictly comply with environment laws and regulations Funding of the Regulatory
Commission The “Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission Fund” was set up to
receive funding from: () grants from the Government or Statutory body; () loans
borrowed by the Commission; () fees and charges deposited under the BERC Act;
and () money received from any other source 238 of 244 APPENDIX : FEASIBILITY
STUDIES OF CURRENT PROJECTS For some of the pipeline projects is given  short
summary with description of challenges and cost Moheshkhali-Anowara For this
project  feasibility study report is available from GTCL The main parameters
from the selected solution are:  Design throughput: 1200 mmscfd Length: 83 km 
 Design pressure: 1135 psig  Dimension: 42”  Wall thickness: 19, mm API  70
The main cost break-down for this pipeline will is estimated to the following:
Lakh Taka USD Percentage Million Land acquisition and right of way 19955 18%
Construction and design work 44235 40% Line pipe and equipment 45106 40%
Contingencies 2185  % Total 111488 100% The average cost per  and inch is hence
40, which we find normal for such terrain and including one big river crossing
The Consultants agree with the use of 42 inch pipelines, even if the capacity
will not be fully used at the commissioning of the project This is in order to
prepare for future market development Kutumbopur-Meghnaghat For this project
feasibility study report is available from GTCL The main parameters from the
selected solution are:  Design throughput: 250 mmscfd Length: 45 km   Design
pressure: 1135 psig  Dimension: 24”  Wall thickness: mm API  60 239 of 244 The
main cost break-down for this pipeline will is estimated to the following: Lakh
Taka USD Percentage Million Land acquisition and right of way 21680 36%
Construction and design work 20268 34% Line pipe and equipment 14516 24%
Contingencies 2754  % Total 59482 100% The average cost per  and inch is hence
69, which we find to be high, but can be explained by many river crossings,
requiring foreign contractors The Consultants find that with such high cost for
land acquisition, crossing of rivers and need for  further strong East-West
connection,  larger diameter pipeline should be chosen Otherwise there will be
need for looping of the pipeline when LNG supply has to be transported to the
West of the country Depending on the technical possibilities, we recommend at
least  30 inch pipeline, but preferably  36 or 42 inch line This will also
contribute to line pack capability for the power plant in Meghnaghat 240 of 244
APPENDIX : RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN BANGLADESH’ LNG IMPORTS Bangladesh has made
speedy and impressive progress since the latest submission of this Gas Sector
Master Plan As part of this report update, some of the key developments are
outlined as below: In order to set up an FSRU with the capacity of 1000 mmcfd (
mtpa) at Payra, EoI is invited for short-listing potential terminal developer
Besides, Tokyo Gas Engineering Solutions (TGES) is conducting feasibility study
to select sites in Moheshkhali/Payra/ any other suitable places for land based
LNG terminal and in order select Terminal Developer for the Construction of the
Land Based LNG Terminals in Moheshkhali/Payra or any other suitable places,
shortlist has been made after evaluation of received proposals against EoI
Regarding LNG importation, the activities are as follows: To import LNG for Long
Term Contract basis, Petrobangla and RasLaffan Liquefied Natural Gas Company
Limited (), Qatar have signed LNG Sales Purchase Agreement (SPA) for 15
(fifteen) years Again, to import LNG, Petrobangla and Oman Trading International
(OTI); Petrobangla and Pertamina (Indonesia) have signed separate MoU on  to
basis It may be signed Long Term Contracts between them Petrobangla and Astra
Transcor Energy (Swizerland); Petrobangla and Gunvor (Singapore) have signed
separate MoU and it may be signed Mid-Term contracts between them To import LNG
from Spot Market, shortlist has been made after evaluation of received proposals
against EoI The LNG pricing will be determined according to Oil index based
Brent formula or Henry Hub formula as per contracts 241 of 244 APPENDIX 10:
QUESTIONNAIRE ON GAS FIELD EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT, OPERATION AND PRODUCTION
AUGMENTATION FOR BANGLADESH Content OBJECTIVE AND DEADLINE 241 INTRODUCTION 241
EXPLORATION 242  Seismic surveys 242  Exploration wells 242  Exploration license
bidding round 242  FIELD DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATIONS 242  Field Development Plans
(FDP) 242  Field operations 243  PRODUCTION AUGMENTATION 243  Wells 243
Production facilities 243  Tail end production 243   &  CAPACITY 243 Objective
and deadline With reference to the on-going project “Update of Gas Master Plan
of Bangladesh” (contract package No -75) authorized to the Consultant (Ramboll
Denmark / in cooperation with the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland
(GEUS) and EQMS) the present questionnaire aim to facilitate data and
information transfer between Petrobangla and the Consultant The Consultant
kindly request response no later than 20th of March 2017 in order to include
nature of response in the Interim Project Report due by 29th of March The
Consultant also request for power to revert with clarifying questions
Introduction  Gas Sector Master Plan (GSMP) was prepared for Petrobangla and the
World Bank by Wood Mackenzie Ltd in 2006 with  time horizon to The update of the
GSMP is designated to  time horizon to 2041, consequently the present
questionnaire focus on the development in the gas field sector from present day
to The main focus for the questionnaire is to update the Consultant on the
present-day and future gas deliverability from the gas fields in Bangladesh As
the main focus of the update of the GSMP is the future gas demand-supply
projection to strengthen  long-term plan for the development of the gas sector
in Bangladesh it is critical that individual gas reserve numbers are documented
as well as any assessment on future reserve increments Further, the Consultants
ask for 242 of 244 documentation for known plans for gas production augmentation
and an assessment for the future potential (not yet planned) The questionnaire
is divided into four sections; ) exploration, ) field development and operation,
) production augmentation and ) current geo-scientific technology stock and
human resources in the Public gas sector For each section  series of questions
are listed and needs to be answered field by field and by prospects  EXPLORATION
Main focus on prospects and prospective areas, leads and plays only if
description can illustrate/document exploration strategies  Seismic surveys )
Map with present-day seismic surveys (2d/3D) with field/license delineations and
acquisition dates ) Map with planned seismic surveys (2D/3D) with field/license
and prospects delineation and planned year for acquisition )  list of amount of
seismic data acquired (km/km2) pr year  Exploration wells ) Map with present-day
exploration and appraisal wells with field/license delineations and spud dates )
Map with planned exploration drilling with field/license and prospects
delineation and planned year for drilling ) List of wells drilled (exploration,
appraisal and/or production) with location (UTM coordinates) of wells, spud
date, purpose, results, status and other relevant information ) List of approved
wells and their location (UTM coordinates) and purpose  Exploration license
bidding round ) Plans for future license bidding round with block description )
Results of past exploration rounds, discoveries made, wells drilled )
Exploration programmes scheduled both by Public and Private Sectors  FIELD
DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATIONS Main issues are to give an update on reserve numbers
and any incremental reserves from additional field development (approved or
planned) To give update on production performance and production forecasts
Field Development Plans (FDP) Location of fields (UTM coordinates) and
delineation of fields ) Latest approved FDP;  Date for production start  Reserve
numbers with description of methodology  If update on reserve numbers; date and
description of methodology  Production forecast  If update on production
forecast; date and methodology  Production mechanism ( natural depletion, water
drive etc) ) Filed FDP for approval; 243 of 244  Date for planned production
start  Reserve numbers with description of methodology  Production forecast
Production mechanism ( natural depletion, water drive etc)  Field operations )
Well status;  Number and date for wells on stream  Well location and completion
interval()  Yearly production pr well ) Field production;  Yearly production
Depletion strategy  Decline curve analysis  3D seismic to delineate/discover
productive zones  Appraisal drilling/logging to delineate/discover productive
zones  PRODUCTION AUGMENTATION Main focus is to describe plans and
potential/possibilities for production augmentation Provide best estimates for
incremental production on existing production forecasts  Wells ) Work-over and
maintenance strategy ) Well stimulation strategy ) Completion strategy and
recompletions ) Number of wells and well locations (top of structure/closure,
down flank)  Production facilities ) Wellhead flowing pressure (relative to
export pressure) ) Compression installation ) Water production facilities )
Optimized production rate  Tail end production ) Depletion strategy (cf §) )
Additional drilling to prove up P2 and P3 reserves   &  CAPACITY Main focus is
to describe the Status of the geo-scientific technology stock and human
resources in the upstream gas sector of Bangladesh ) Description of the geo-
scientific technology stock ) Description of the human resources in the Public
gas sector 244 of 244 APPENDIX 11: LIST OF KEY REFERENCES  Bangladesh Gas Act
(2010)  Bangladesh Gas Sector Master Plan 2016 {Wood MacKenzie 2006}  Bangladesh
Power Development Board Annual Reports ()  BP Stastical Review 2017  Consultancy
Services for Gas Production Augmentation Strengthening of the Hydrocarbon Unit
(Phase II), Bangladesh {Schlumberger 2011}  Consulting Services for Preparation
of Implementation and Financing Plan for Gas Sector Development {Dorsch Gruppe,
2012}  GTCL Annual Report   Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC),
2015  International Monetary Fund Online Database JGTDSL Annual Reports,  KGDCL
Annual Reports,  National Energy Policy {GoB 2004} GTCL Daily Gas Production and
Supply Statistics, 2017 Future Scenarios for the Bangladesh Petroleum Sector
Development {Gustavson 2012} People’ Republic of Bangladesh: Preparing the Clean
Fuel Sector Development Program {TCIL 2009} People’ Republic of Bangladesh Data
Collection Survey on Integrated Development for Southern Chittagong Region {JICA
2016} People’ Republic of Bangladesh: Natural Gas Transmission & Distribution
Development Investment Program {ADB 2016} People’ Republic of Bangladesh Power &
Energy Sector Master Plan (PSMP2016) Petrobangla Annual Reports () Petrobangla
Daily Gas & Condensate Production and Distribution Reports, Jun 2017 Petrobangla
Five Year Gas Supply Strategy (Year ), 2015 PGCL Annual Report 2015 RPGCL Annual
Reports  Seventh Five Year Plan FY2016-FY2020 – Accelerating Growth, Empowering
Citizens, 2015 TGTDCL Annual Reports,  Technical Assistance to Review the
Approach for Increasing the Efficiency of Gas Utilization in Certain Major Users
{TCIL 2015} Techni-economical Feasibility Study for Development of the Land at
Moheshkhali Island by Dredging Chars, Shoals for Land Based LNG Terminal {IWM
2017} Update Report on Bangladesh Gas Reserve Estimation 2010 {Gustavson 2011}
Geological Survey – PetroBangla Cooperative Assessment of Undiscovered Natural
Gas Resources of Bangladesh, 2001 World Bank Online Database