BANGLADESH ADVANCING DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH THROUGH ENERGY (BADGE) PROJECT
Advancing energy security and resilience in Bangladesh Energy security and
access continue to play  crucial role in Bangladesh’ ability to meet its
economic growth targets and sustain rising living standards USAID, in
collaboration with the  government interagency in Dhaka, continues to work with
the Government of Bangladesh (GOB) and the private sector to create  more
welcoming business and investment environment and  more level-playing field for
both local and international companies in the energy sector In light of the
above, USAID Bangladesh’ flagship clean energy project – Bangladesh Advancing
Development and Growth through Energy (BADGE) – is working to improve energy
security and resilience in Bangladesh by improving access to affordable,
reliable, and sustainable energy systems, and promoting transparent and
efficient energy markets By supporting the deployment of advanced and clean
energy systems, promotion of transparent and best-value procurement for energy,
and increased participation in regional energy trade and cooperation—all
overseen by high-performing energy institutions—the energy sector in Bangladesh
will contribute to the sustainable development goals of achieving prosperity,
well-being, and resilience of its citizens USAID FACT SHEET – BADGE ENERGY
PROJECT |  USAIDGOV/BANGLADESH The BADGE project has already signed  Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) with the Power Division of the Bangladesh Government and
working on partnership arrangements with several other private sector players to
advance investment in the sector, promote policy and regulatory environments
favorable to the sector and investors, support entrepreneurs developing and
distributing energy technologies, and convene platforms to share best practices
in the management of the energy sector Altogether, BADGE is supporting
Bangladesh’ transformation to  developed, decarbonized and inclusive energy
sector PROGRAM HIGHLIGHTS Since its inception in June 2021, BADGE is supporting
the transformation of Bangladesh’ energy sector for the next five years to
accelerate energy security and sustainability in Bangladesh and the South Asia
region Intended outcomes from this activity align with the Clean EDGE Asia
Initiative and USAID Climate Strategy The $million of  technical assistance
implemented by Tetra Tech ES, Inc is playing  critical role in supporting the
GOB’ management of the energy sector, creating an efficient and transparent
energy market for long term investment stability, and helping mobilize clean
energy finance The USAID BADGE program is working to achieve the following
results: FOR MORE INFORMATION USAID Bangladesh Shayan Shafi Energy Team Leader
Email: sshafi@usaidgov USAIDGOV/BANGLADESH USAID FACT SHEET – BADGE ENERGY
PROJECT |