 RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY OF BANGLADESH POWER DIVISION MINISTRY OF POWER, ENERGY
AND MINERAL RESOURCES GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’ REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH 18
DECEMBER 2008 DHAKA -- Table of Contents:  RIGHT TO INTERPRETATION: Page:
Introduction  Energy is one of the basic ingredients required to alleviate
poverty and socio-economic development GOB has issued its Vision and Policy
Statement in February 2000, to bring the entire country under electricity
service by the year 2020 in phases, in line with the direction of the Article 16
of ‘The Constitution of the People’ Republic of Bangladesh,’ to remove the
disparity in the standards of living between the urban and rural areas through
rural electrification and development The energy prospect is generally assessed
on the basis of available commercial sources of energy , fossil fuel like gas,
coal, oil etc Worldwide, there is  major transition underway in the energy
sector It is happening due to the following three major reasons: ()  decline in
fossil fuel availability, their predicted gradual extinction in the next few
decades and the resultant price volatility due to demand-supply gap The need to
drastically cut global emissions for mitigating climate change (80% reduction by
2050) The need for energy security (ii) (iii) In Bangladesh efficient
utilization of renewable energy resources is yet to assume commercial dimensions
and hence rational policy dissemination on renewable energy usage is essential
The renewable energy includes solar, wind, biomass, hydro, geo- thermal, tidal
wave etc Renewable energy in the form of traditional biomass is the main source
of primary energy in the country comprising some % percent of total primary
energy use The size and economic potential of the renewable energy resources (,
solar photovoltaic, solar thermal power, wind power, biogas, etc) in Bangladesh
are yet to be determined and the capacity of renewable energy development is
presently low Although investment costs of renewables are generally higher
compared to fossil fuel alternatives, this option becomes economically viable
when all externalities ( environmental cost, health hazards etc) and lower
operating cost are taken into consideration   The major sources of renewable
energy are:  Solar  Solar photovoltaic: Solar photovoltaic (PV) systems are in
use throughout the country with over 300,000 household-level installations
having capacity of about 15 MW (November 2008) Scaling-up of solar PV systems
assisted by through Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL), Rural
Electrification Board (REB), Local Government Engineering Department (LGED),
Bangladesh Power Development Board (BPDB), NGOs and Private Organizations
implementing solar energy program There is  strong potential for solar energy
within the country the development partners are being implemented  technology
involves harnessing solar radiation for generation of electricity Solar Thermal
Power/Concentrating Solar Power (CSP): The -- through  number of steps finally
generating mechanical energy to run  generator This technology needs to be
disseminated in the country to supplement the power supply  Wind Energy: Wind
Energy has also made some inroads but its potential is mainly in coastal areas,
and offshore islands with strong wind regimes These coastal settings afford good
opportunities for wind-powered pumping and electricity generation Presently
there are  MW of installed wind turbines at Feni and Kutubdia  Biomass:
Bangladesh has strong potential for biomass gasification based electricity More
common biomass resources available in the country are rice husk, crop residue,
wood, jute stick, animal waste, municipal waste, sugarcane bagasse etc This
technology can be disseminated on  larger scale for electricity generation
Biogas: Biogas mainly from animal and municipal wastes may be one of the
promising renewable energy resources for Bangladesh Presently there are tens of
thousands of households and village-level biogas plants in place throughout the
country It is  potential source to harness basic biogas technology for cooking,
and rural and peri-urban electrification to provide electricity during periods
of power shortfalls  Hydro: Microhydro and minihydro have limited potential in
Bangladesh, with the exception of Chittagong and the Chittagong Hill tracts
Hydropower assessments have identified some possible sites from 10 kW to  MW but
no appreciable capacity has yet been installed There is one hydro power plant at
Kaptai established in the 1960s with present installed capacity of 230 MW  Other
renewable energy sources include bio-fuels, gasohol, geothermal, river current,
wave and tidal energy Potentialities of these sources are yet to be explored
Objectives The objectives of renewable energy policy are to: () Harness the
potential of renewable energy resources and dissemination of renewable energy
technologies in rural, peri-urban and urban areas; (ii) Enable, encourage and
facilitate both public and private sector investment in renewable energy
projects; (iii) Develop sustainable energy supplies to substitute indigenous
non-renewable energy supplies; (iv) Scale up contributions of renewable energy
to electricity production; () Scale up contributions of renewable energy both to
electricity and to heat energy; -- (vi) Promote appropriate, efficient and
environment friendly use of renewable energy; (vii) Train; facilitate the use of
renewable energy at every level of energy usage (viii) Create enabling
environment and legal support to encourage the use of renewable energy (ix)
Promote development of local technology in the field of renewable energy ()
Promote clean energy for CDM; and (xi) Achieve the targets for developing
renewable energy resources to meet five percent of the total power demand by
2015 and ten percent by The policy will become effective from the date of
publication in the official gazette  Institutional Arrangements  An institution,
Sustainable Energy Development Agency (SEDA), shall be established under the
Companies Act, 1994, as  focal point for sustainable energy development and
promotion, ‘sustainable energy’ comprising renewable energy and energy
efficiency SEDA Board will comprise of representatives of stakeholders including
business community, academics and/or representative from Bangladesh Solar Energy
Society, NGOs, financial institutions and implementing agencies The
responsibilities of SEDA as  company shall be to: () Provide coordination of
sustainable energy planning, including action plans linking together the
activities of several agencies or organizations; (ii) Promote awareness of
renewable energy and other clean energy technologies and integrate their
development within overall national energy policy and development; (iii) Support
demonstration of new technologies and new business models for renewable energy
and other clean energy technologies; (iv) Support establishment of small and
medium renewable energy enterprises and providers; () Enable systematic
development of renewable energy projects and opportunities through energy
audits; (vi) Create market opportunities and start-up business models for
sustainable energy technologies in Bangladesh, such as energy services companies
and rural energy providers; (vii) Develop financing mechanisms and facilities by
using grant, subsidy and/or carbon/CDM fund for public and private sector
investments in all forms of sustainable energy; -- (viii) Collect data and
assess the renewable energy resource base, especially in the context of rural
energy master plan; (ix) Provide fund for the development of standardized
renewable energy configurations to meet common energy and power applications,
such as solar, biogas and bio-diesel for mechanical irrigation and improved
community practices for forest management and conversion and use of fuel wood by
using grant, subsidy and/or carbon/CDM fund; () Stimulate market development for
sustainable energy technologies, such as improved cook stoves and household
biogas digesters; (xi) Provide financial support in the research and development
of renewable energy technology; (xii) Implement policies for mitigation of
environmental issues arising out of use of Renewable Energy; and (xiii) Solicit
and processing of grid connected renewable energy projects  Power Division of
the MPEMR or its assignee will facilitate the development of renewable energy
until SEDA is formed  Overall policy formulation and development functions of
renewable energy shall lie with the Power Division of the MPEMR  Resource,
Technology and Program Development  SEDA in conjunction with the Power Division
of the MPEMR shall be responsible for determining the priorities for renewable
energy technology development and program implementation  SEDA shall support
capacity building, technology development, and market development sufficient to
boost the share of electricity generated from renewable energy technologies  All
power utilities, Local Government Engineering Department(LGED), other interested
government departments, private agencies and NGOs are to develop renewable
energy development program for implementation throughout the country
Electricity generated from renewable energy projects, both in public and private
sectors may be purchased by power utilities or any consumer through mutual
agreement (less than  MW)  Renewable energy project sponsors may use existing
electricity transmission and distribution systems, if there is adequate
capacity, to supply electricity to its customers through mutual agreement
between the owner of transmission/distribution facilities The sponsor will
require to pay  wheeling charge to the owner of transmission/distribution
facilities The wheeling charges shall be determined by BERC in consultation with
the Power Division of MPEMR the project sponsor and --  In addition to
electricity generation, renewable energy for solar heating and biogas or other
means like cooking etc shall be developed  SEDA will encourage human resource
development and local production of renewable energy equipment, facilitate and
monitor quality of renewable energy equipment, and will assist to setup quality
control laboratory to test the renewable energy equipment  For large biomass
electricity projects ( greater than  MW) the project developer must demonstrate
that the biomass is being sustainably harvested and that no adverse social
impact will result from that development  Production and use of bio-fuels may be
encouraged in limited scale without jeopardizing the existing crops  Investment
and Fiscal Incentives  Existing renewable energy financing facility shall be
expanded that is capable of accessing public, private, donor, carbon emission
trading (CDM) and carbon funds and providing financing for renewable energy
investments  To prompt renewable energy in power sector, all renewable energy
equipments and related raw materials in producing renewable energy equipments
will be exempted from charging 15% VAT SEDA or power division of the MPEMR or
its assignee until SEDA is formed, will fix up the acceptable mechanism to reach
the benefits of tax exemption to end users in consultation with NBR  In addition
to commercial lending,  network of micro-credit support system will be
established especially in rural and remote areas to provide financial support
for purchases of renewable energy equipment  Power Division of MPEMR will
facilitate investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency projects SEDA,
in co-operation with local government offices, will set up an outreach program
to develop renewable energy programs  SEDA will consider providing subsidies to
utilities for installation of solar, wind, biomass or any other renewable/clean
energy projects  Private sector participation including joint venture
initiatives in renewable energy development will be encouraged and promoted
Power Division of MPEMR/SEDA may assist in locating the project() and also
assist in acquiring land for renewable energy project()  Renewable energy
project investors both in public and private sectors shall be exempted from
corporate income tax for  period of  years from the date of notification of this
policy in the official gazette and it will be extended periodically following
impact assessment of tax exemption on renewable energy  An incentive tariff may
be considered for electricity generated from renewable energy sources which may
be 10% higher than the highest purchase price of electricity by the utility from
private generators --  To promote solar water heaters, use of electricity and
gas for water heating will be discouraged In this regard necessary steps will be
considered accordingly 10 For successful implementation of renewable energy
projects and initiatives lending procedure will be simplified and strengthened
Regulatory Policy  Renewable energy project(), to sale electricity from plants
shall be required to get power generation license from BERC if the capacity of
the project() is  MW or more  Power Division of MPEMR and SEDA, in consultation
with BERC will create  regulatory framework encouraging generation of
electricity from renewable energy sources  BERC shall approve the energy tariff
in consultation with Power Division of MPEMR/SEDA as per the provision of the
BERC Act 2003 if the capacity of renewable energy project() is  MW or more
Electricity distributors may offer “green energy” tariffs, which provide
consumers an opportunity to co-finance through their electricity bills the
development of new renewable energy sources  Right to Interpretation () Section
headings are for convenience only and shall not affect interpretation of any
section () In case of ambiguity with regard to interpretation of any provision
of these Guidelines, GOB interpretation shall be final  Glossary of
Abbreviations/ Acronyms/ Terms BERC BPDB CDM GOB IDCOL LGED MOF MPEMR NEP RE REB
SEDA RETs VAT Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission Bangladesh Power
Development Board Clean Development Mechanism Government of the People’ Republic
of Bangladesh Infrastructure Development Company Limited Local Government
Engineering Department Ministry of Finance Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral
Resources National Energy Policy Renewable Energy Rural Electrification Board
Sustainable Energy Development Agency Renewable Energy Technologies Value Added
Tax --