Table of Contents:  Programme rationale : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/BEN/  Programme rationale  Benin achieved strong annual economic growth
of  per cent, on average, between 2013 and 2017, driven largely by public and
private investment and the agricultural and services sectors Despite this
progress, poverty remained high, at per cent in 2015 compared to per cent in
Growth remained unequal:  Gini index of 499 in 2015, with wide geographical and
social disparities Poverty affects rural areas the most (per cent, against per
cent in urban areas), particularly in the north and the southwest Non-monetary
poverty affects more women-headed households (per cent) than men-headed
households (per cent) The Human Development Index is low, at 485; Benin ranked
167th out of 188 countries in The high level of poverty is linked to weak
competitiveness and insufficient diversification of economic growth sources The
agricultural sector, which concentrates 50 per cent of employment in rural
areas, is poorly developed and under-productive Moreover, the informal sector
employs 90 per cent of the workforce The unemployment rate affects  per cent of
young men aged , against  per cent of young women and 16 per cent of young
graduates But the overall situation hides  high under-employment rate of 72 per
cent among the employed population (90 per cent for women in rural areas) This
reality, if not properly addressed, could threaten social cohesion and peace
Gender inequality results, among other factors, from low education levels,
limited professional skills, and insufficient access to production elements
(land, financing, technology) Local economic development is hampered by  lack of
technical and financial support The persistence of poverty and inequality result
also from the poor quality of governance and inadequate social protection
systems for vulnerable groups and marginalized people  Benin is  member of the
major economic zones in the subregion, with an economy heavily dependent on
trade with neighbouring Nigeria The economic-commercial relationships with
Nigeria have been interrupted during the last decade by shocks mainly affecting
the tertiary sector With regard to good governance, according to the World Bank
Doing Business report, 2018, public services face high operating costs, low-
quality services and limited digitalization Corruption remains  major challenge:
according to the Transparency International corruption index, 2017, Benin ranks
85th out of 180 countries The integrated analysis8 of the planning system
reveals that there is insufficient implementation of reforms for results-based
budget management, and Sustainable Development Goals targets are poorly
reflected in planning documents Statistical capacities are low, particularly in
terms of analytical data disaggregated by sector, subregion, gender, disability,
and people’ vulnerabilities  Benin enjoys peace and stability at the political
level, coupled with economic growth Nevertheless, the Ibrahim Index of African
Governance, 2017, did not improve greatly between 2013 and 2017 (to 59) This
reflects, inter alia, the weakness of the main regulatory institutions –
legislative and judiciary – essential to consolidating democracy and the rule of
law The partisan political system is weak, undermining stability and peace
during election periods; and electoral processes need to be strengthened With
respect to the security situation, Benin has been spared the terrorism
afflicting other countries in West Africa However, the porous nature of its
borders could facilitate the unimpeded movement of people, including for
criminal purposes: drug trafficking, cybercrime, armed robbery, and clashes
between pastoralists and crop farmers are of concern On justice and human
rights, rural populations and demographics such as the poor, women, youth, and
people with disabilities have limited access to justice due to inefficient
enforcement of rules and  Average over the last five years, International
Monetary Fund (IMF), February 2018  Enquête modulaire intégrée sur les
conditions de vie de ménages, 2015 ; National Institute of Statistics and
Economic Analysis  Ibid  Ibid  Ibid  State of Employment in Benin, World Bank,
2015  Doing Business report, World Bank,   Priorisation des cibles des Objectifs
de développement durable au Bénin, Ministry of Planning and Development, 2017
DP/DCP/BEN/ laws; around 45 per cent9 of the population do not trust the justice
system Poor prison conditions and long periods of pre-trial detention persist
Women represent per cent of the population, with per cent under 10 Despite the
promulgation of several laws protecting and promoting women and girls’ rights,11
and the adoption of  national gender policy and an action plan to fight gender-
based violence, the rate of gender- based violence was at per cent per year
according to the 2014 annual report from listening and referral centres, and the
gap between women and men persists, at per cent in terms of living conditions
and participation12 Employed women are paid 19 per cent less than men
Reproductive health and socio-cultural issues, along with poor education, are
the major causes of these gaps In 2015, per cent of women had completed
secondary education (and per cent of men) Progress made in women’ representation
in the decision-making bodies is limited; in 2017, the proportion women in the
National Assembly was  per cent, versus the African Union target of 30 per
cent13 Continuation of this trend would hinder sustainable development  Linked
to sustainable development and resilience, climate change has negative socio-
economic effects, leading to high vulnerability to natural disasters During the
period, about ,468 inhabitants per million were deprived of shelter each year
due to natural disasters14 The major causes are: weak ownership and
implementation of national policies and legislation; low awareness of climate
and environmental risks; and unsustainable production and consumption patterns
Low availability of and accessibility to diversified sources of renewable energy
for households remain environmental risks and poverty factors In 2015, the share
of renewable energy in overall energy consumption was  per cent, against the 50
per cent by 2030 target Plant cover was threatened, with  depletion rate of per
cent15 in Urbanization, at 44 per cent16 in 2015, has been accelerating, leading
to challenges related to urban mobility, pollution, housing, and land management
Benin formulated ‘Benin Revealed, ,’  government action programme that aims to
“sustainably revive the economic and social development of Benin” It is built
around three pillars: () consolidating democracy, the rule of law and good
governance; () ensuring structural transformation of the economy; and ()
improving people’ living conditions Given mixed results in reducing poverty and
inequality, the Government developed its Sustainable Development Goals- based
national development plan, , to include the social, economic and environmental
dimensions of the 2030 Agenda The programme for growth and sustainable
development, 2018- 2021, which will operationalize the national development
plan, is anchored in the framework of the Sustainable Development Goals and
Agenda 2063 of the African Union and benefits from the IMF Extended Credit
Facility arrangement, approved in 2017 to address public finances and poverty
challenges, whose first review was satisfactory The Government is putting in
place an inclusive coordination and monitoring mechanism to implement the Goals
This will include mobilizing stakeholders around the priority targets, with
synergetic actions between sectoral ministries at the central and local levels,
civil society organizations, and development partners As  critical multilateral
agency, in complementarity with other United Nations organizations and key
partners, UNDP is well positioned to assist in implementing the programme for
growth and sustainable development and the national development plan  The
midterm evaluation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework,  and
the evaluation of the outcomes of the previous cycle, showed that UNDP enjoyed
the trust of partners at all levels and highlighted its comparative advantage
UNDP, in partnership with the Government, spearheaded the promotion of
-governance, planning, gender mainstreaming, and  Human Development Report, 2016
10 Fourth Benin population census 11 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, Maputo Protocol 12 Human Development Report,
2016 13 Fourth Benin population census 14 Human Development Report, 2016 15 Ibid
16 African Economic Outlook, 2016  DP/DCP/BEN/ evaluation of development
policies,17 as well as the conduct of other key reforms UNDP contributed to
national capacity development efforts for  more effective parliament and
peaceful electoral processes UNDP support is recognized as having sustained
peace through the establishment of 77 communal and six departmental peace
committees and the elaboration of national charter for social dialogue, and
having promoted employment by establishing three entrepreneurship centres and
developing millennium villages UNDP has been  key government partner towards the
formulation of development policies, prioritization of 49 Sustainable
Development Goals targets, two related to gender equality (Goal ), and
accelerators for Goals , , , and That support contributed to the successful
participation of the Government in the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development, UNDP support also allowed  better understanding of climate
challenge issues, development of national and local management tools, and the
nationally determined contribution  The previous country programme was
implemented in close partnership with national, technical and financial
partners, civil society organizations, the private sector and South-South and
triangular cooperation The previous cycle revealed that the lack of an exit
strategy for some projects, and mobility and insufficiently qualified human
resources in public administration, can jeopardize the sustainability and
ownership of some interventions UNDP will consolidate achievements by ensuring
focused scale-up of results around Sustainable Development Goals accelerators at
the local level (such as sustainable energy, youth employment, and income
generating activities) Based on its comparative advantage, lessons learned, and
resources constraints, UNDP will widen its partnerships, funding and stakeholder
base, and take advantage of its Strategic Plan signature solutions and global
and local platform support to the Sustainable Development Goals II Programme
priorities and partnerships  UNDP will promote  more inclusive, resilient
society, with sustainable and shared economic growth, breaking the cycle of
poverty and inequality – particularly in rural and peri-urban areas – and
following the principle of ‘leaving no one behind’ The transformational pathways
are twofold: () Promoting inclusive, strong and sustainable economic growth by
stimulating the local economy, providing services to youth, women, and people
with disabilities to enhance their employability, and investing in sustainable
livelihoods, with  focus on the vulnerable and people at risk At-risk
demographics include young graduates, unemployed and under-employed women,
people with disabilities, extremely poor populations, and those located on the
borders and rural areas18 Since the population is highly dependent on
agriculture, the country programme will invest in smart agriculture,  ‘green’
economy, and natural resources and disaster risk management, to strengthen
resilience at the institutional and community levels () Promoting good
governance and the rule of law by building capacities of public administration
and local institutions to drive reforms that enable economic diversification,
accelerate sustainable economic growth, increase income, and improve delivery of
basic services, strengthening community and citizen participation in formulating
and implementing public policies In line with the priorities of the UNDP
Strategic Plan, , the country programme focuses on two of the three outcomes of
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, , as well as the pillars of
the programme of government action The country programme aims to support the
implementation of the programme of government action, , the national development
plan,  and the programme for growth and sustainable development, 2018- The
country programme outcomes will contribute to the achievement of Sustainable
Development Goals , , , , 10, 12, 13, 15, 16 and Considering the universality
and indivisibility of the Goals, the country programme will support the
establishment of the Goals acceleration platform to facilitate integrated and
innovative solutions in collaboration with United Nations country team planning
It is based on the comparative advantage of UNDP in monitoring the
implementation of international commitments and agreements, including Agenda
2063, the 2030 Agenda, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, and the
Paris 17 National Action Plan, , ‘MDG Momentum: ,000 Days of Action’ 18 Common
country assessment, 2017, United Nations country team, Benin  DP/DCP/BEN/
Agreement on Climate Change The country programme will seek to improve public
policies to diversify sources of sustainable growth, particularly social safety
nets targeting marginalized populations On agricultural potential, investments
will be directed towards strengthening the employability and entrepreneurship of
youth, women and people with disabilities, and creating conditions conducive to
participation in wealth creation, redistribution, and decision-making processes
Technical and operational capacities of vulnerable populations in rural areas
will be strengthened through sustainable production and livelihoods to increase
resilience Promoting inclusive, strong and sustainable economic growth This
component of the country programme will focus on capacity building for inclusive
economic growth – focusing on the private sector and professional organizations
in rural areas – towards economic, environmental and social viability,
particularly in the north and the southwest of the country UNDP interventions
aim to innovate and scale up best practices from one to four municipalities by
developing economic opportunities and improving market access for youth and
women, people with disabilities, and entrepreneurs, and promoting equal pay for
work of equal value in small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises In
partnership with the private sector and development partners (the Global
Environment Facility – GEF; the West African Development Bank; the International
Labour Organization – ILO; the Food and Agriculture Organization – FAO; the
United Nations Capital Development Fund – UNCDF; the Green Climate Fund, and the
German Agency for International Cooperation), institutional support will be
provided for establishing organizations for women and youth (including people
with disabilities) in rural and peri-urban areas Technical and managerial
capacities of young entrepreneurs and their access to appropriate financing and
equipment, as well as entrepreneurship promotion institutions, will be
strengthened Because local products contribute to poverty reduction, processing
techniques and market access will be promoted to create value chains At the
policy level, UNDP will support the Government in revising the National
Employment Policy by introducing mechanisms to access finance and information
UNDP will support Benin in implementing its commitments under the Paris
Agreement and in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals The scaling-up of
best practices from the national adaptation programme of action and the
nationally determined contribution will be key areas for country office
interventions in designing appropriate laws, regulations, policies and
strategies on climate change Innovative approaches will be used in formulating
policies and establishing  platform for the integrated management of
multilateral agreements on environment and promotion of adaptable climate tools
The expected results will be improved agricultural productivity, acceleration
and diversification of revenues, and improved youth entrepreneurship UNDP
contributions seek to enhance more sustainable natural resources management and
better resilience to climate change This will contribute to implementation of
the 2030 Agenda and accelerate the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals
related to economic growth and institution-building for structural employment,
poverty reduction, gender equality, and transformation UNDP will focus on three
major service lines: () increasing the well-being and income of people,
especially youth, women and persons with disabilities, by locally setting up
socio-economic infrastructures and equipment that respond to basic needs,
developing economic activities, and promoting self-employment, employability and
entrepreneurship; () conserving, enhancing and restoring forest ecosystems and
natural resources, and promoting affordable clean energy; and () improving
people’ resilience to extreme hydro-meteorological and climate events These
interventions are aligned with UNDP Strategic Plan signature solutions , , , ,
and  To ensure the success of this strategic option, UNDP will focus on the most
vulnerable rural and peri-urban communities, and the most exposed to economic,
climate and environmental shocks and stresses The country programme will seek to
reach the most disadvantaged groups in 28 municipalities, some of which are
particularly exposed to flooding in the north and rising sea levels in the south
The country office will focus on capacity-building and appropriation of
development tools at central and local levels in response to vulnerability to
climate change and rapid urbanization This will encompass innovative approaches
to improving livelihoods by accessing agricultural technologies adapted to
climate change The programme will ensure that () national  DP/DCP/BEN/ and local
capacities are strengthened for effective coordination of environmental
interventions, ecosystem protection and disaster risk management, ensuring
women’ equal participation in those processes; and () national and local
institutions have improved technical and financial capacities for the
sustainable management of natural capital In interventions geared towards
resilient and integrated development, UNDP, UNFPA, the United Nations Children’
Fund (UNICEF), the World Food Programme (WFP), the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, Belgium, Japan, and the Islamic
Development Bank will coordinate efforts according to their mandates, expertise
and institutional capacities Communes, local-level state administrations and
civil society organizations will be involved in implementing the country
programme, which is essentially ‘territorialized’  technical and financial
partnership with German Cooperation, the Green Climate Fund, the Netherlands,
the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the West African Development Bank will
help achieve the projected results Partnerships with the private sector (local
and national) to promote sustainable development will be strengthened, notably
within the framework of public and private partnerships initiated by the
Government South-South and triangular cooperation will be  key driver Regarding
youth employment and entrepreneurship, agro-business and early warning systems,
the best practices and lessons learned from Bhutan, Colombia, Costa Rica, and
India will be expanded The partnership strategy of the country office will build
on its comparative advantage as  credible partner of the Government and others,
based on its capacity to deliver effectively and to leverage vertical funds
Consolidating democracy and the rule of law, and promoting good governance
peaceful society with strong institutions is accountable and responsive to the
voice of citizens, opens doors, and lays the foundations for inclusive,
sustainable growth that leaves no one behind The other component of the country
programme will therefore focus on strengthening the effectiveness of the
institutions in charge of the economy, good governance and human rights In
alignment with UNDP Strategic Plan signature solution , UNDP will provide
support to help achieve Sustainable Development Goals , , 10, 12, 16 and 17,
among others, by contributing to the transformation of governance through
advocacy, advisory services, innovation in public administration, -governance,
civil society engagement mechanisms, and capacity-building UNDP will work to
consolidate achievements in the areas of democracy, governance, conflict
prevention, prevention of violent extremism, and citizen participation in
sustaining peace, and will focus its interventions on: () support to government
institutional and political reforms; () strategic and technical support to the
central and decentralized public administration through digitalizing and
simplifying procedures, strengthening the National Human Rights Commission and
key checks and balances institutions; () support to the electoral process; ()
strengthening the capacity of judicial institutions to consolidate the rule of
law; () monitoring the national gender action plan and advocacy for increasing
women’ participation in decision-making as well as in the legal frameworks,
political representation and access to justice; () providing technical support
to public institutions (parliament, Supreme and constitutional courts), civil
society and the media to strengthen civic engagement and democratic oversight;
and () supporting implementation of the Strategic Plan of the parliament UNDP
will support the peaceful management of conflicts as well as the leaders and
grass-roots organizations involved in inter-religious dialogue, particularly in
the border regions with Niger and Nigeria, as part of co-existence and promotion
of tolerance to prevent violent extremism and radicalization The expected
results will be an enhanced democratic and electoral process and improved
justice, gender equality, human rights, and social cohesion UNDP will strengthen
the technical and financial capacities of national and local institutions to
carry out upstream interventions based on the 2030 Agenda priorities UNDP will
support comprehensive Sustainable Development Goals-based policies and plans, at
both national and local levels As part of resources mobilization efforts for
financing the Goals, UNDP will support the Government in carrying out the
development financing assessment and implementing its action plan In technical
partnership with the IMF, the World Bank, Canada, and Germany, UNDP will
continue its support towards full implementation of the West African Economic
and Monetary Union public finance reforms, including results-based budgeting
UNDP will continue to support national institutions to improve coherence between
planning, budget programming, and the needs  DP/DCP/BEN/ related to achieving
Sustainable Development Goals priority targets Given the challenges in
statistics, UNDP will support strengthening national capacities to collect,
analyse and disseminate statistical data for monitoring and evaluating
development policies, including disaggregated data on gender and disabilities
The expected results will be improved quality of public services, results-
oriented policies, and efficient, accountable institutions UNDP will strengthen
its partnerships with Belgium, France, the European Union, Germany, India,
Japan, Luxembourg, Spain, Switzerland, and the United States of America, as well
as with the World Bank, AfDB, and the Islamic Development Bank ((IDB),
particularly within the framework of the Sustaining Peace Initiative, as well as
with South-South cooperation, the United Nations Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office, and the United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs UNDP is  trusted partner whose
experience in supporting electoral processes will strengthen partnerships with
these stakeholders and consolidate its position in -governance, conflict
prevention and social cohesion In partnership with UNFPA, UNICEF, and UN-Women,
UNDP will operationalize the common chapter of its Strategic Plan, , on gender
equality and the improvement of data management for sustainable development III
Programme and risk management The country programme will articulate how UNDP
contributes to national priorities and reports to the Executive Board on the
extent to which results relate to objectives and resources The UNDP programme
and operational policies and procedures and internal control framework
articulate how managers are accountable at all levels In accordance with
Executive Board decision 2013/, all direct costs associated with implementing
the programme will be charged to the concerned funds through direct project
costs The office will adjust its structure to meet the operational requirements
of the programme Execution of the country programme will be anchored in the
Ministry of Planning and Development National implementation will be the
preferred modality, while direct implementation considered as needed The use of
harmonized instruments for operationalization and programming, such as joint
programming and business operations strategies, will be promoted The selection
of implementing partners will consider comparative advantage and effective
delivery of results In coordination with other United Nations organizations,
UNDP will use the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers to manage fiduciary
risks and build capacities of executing partners for, inter alia, results-based
management Accelerated procedures can be adopted as needed For ownership of the
country programme and the UNDP exit strategy, national partners will be fully
engaged in planning and management processes through steering and technical
committees Effective government leadership will be an enabling factor to
efficient implementation and sustainability of results Programme implementation
may be subject to the following risks: () insufficient qualifications and high
turnover of public administration staff; () natural disasters; () strikes in
public administration; and () low resource mobilization, especially government
cost-sharing To mitigate those risks, UNDP will strengthen its resources
mobilization strategy; diversify; and widen its funding and stakeholder base by
developing partnerships with the private sector, foundations, international
financial institutions, the Green Climate Fund, and non-traditional donors UNDP
will capitalize on the results of the development financing assessment and
South-South cooperation The management of security risks and those related to
social conflicts will be based on the United Nations country team security risk
assessment UNDP will use risk monitoring as  tool for early warning, reporting
and decision-making Considering qualified human resources, UNDP will use the
resources available for the two Sustainable Development Goals platforms to
support operationalization of the Goals UNDP will reinforce its partnerships
with the ministries of planning, finance, and education to promote vocational
training at all levels  DP/DCP/BEN/ UNDP quality assurance and social and
environmental standards will be applied to all projects, as will gender
mainstreaming; the country office will achieve the ‘gold gender seal’ during the
country programme cycle IV Monitoring and evaluation Programme monitoring will
be based on the Strategic Plan Integrated Results and Resources Framework
Deliverables will be jointly monitored by implementing institutions, beneficiary
representatives, and the country office through the steering and technical
committees and joint field visits Outputs and outcomes will be monitored through
quarterly and annual reports Indicators and their rating scales will be adapted
when country-level indicators become available UNDP will support data collection
at the beginning of the programme to identify missing baselines, including for
international multilateral agreements Evaluations will be conducted in
accordance with the evaluation policy and plan  midterm evaluation of the
programme will be carried out to inform its implementation and provide inputs
for the next country programme Project evaluations will be conducted when
mandatory or as needed Joint reviews and evaluations will be conducted with
other United Nations organizations At least  per cent of programme resources
will be allocated to monitoring, evaluation and data collection activities The
gender marker will be considered in planning, decision-making, reporting and
investing Programme indicators will be collected according to gender, age, and
geographical area, and disaggregated insofar as possible The data collected will
feed into the UNDP monitoring and knowledge-sharing system and communications
for visibility Together with the Government and other United Nations
organizations, UNDP will mobilize partners to strengthen the national statistics
system, particularly the National Institute of Statistics, to improve the
quality and availability of data and Sustainable Development Goals indicators
and better target programme beneficiaries Research institutes and universities
will collaborate in testing theories of change and innovative solutions
throughout the country programme cycle   DP/DCP/BEN/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Benin () National priority or goal: Pillar  of the government
action programme(PAG) – Improve the living conditions of the population UNDAF
(or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No  By 2023, Benin’ population,
especially the most vulnerable, are more resilient and have  better quality of
life through access to decent employment, food and nutrition security, clean
energy, and the sustainable management of natural resources, the adverse effects
of climate change, crises and disasters Related strategic plan outcome (, if
known): Advance the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions
Indicative resources, by outcome ($ thousands) UNDAF outcome indicator(),
baselines, target() Data source and frequency of data collection, and
responsibilities Major partners/ partnerships frameworks Indicative country
programme outputs (including indicators, baselines targets) Regular ,688
Indicator  Monetary poverty rate Baseline – national: % (Urban: %; Rural: %)
Target: To be determined (TBD) Enquête modulaire intégrée sur les conditions de
vie de ménages (EMICoV) Every  years National Institute of Statistics and
Economic Analysis (INSAE) Output  Marginalized groups, particularly
underemployed youth and women are empowered to gain access to financial assets,
benefit from sustainable jobs and develop entrepreneurship Ministry of
Agriculture Ministry of Environment Ministry of Social Affairs and Microfinances
Ministry of Planning and Development (MPD) Ministry of Small and Medium-Sized
Enterprises and Employment Promotion Ministry of Mines and Energy Ministry of
Decentralization Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCIB) Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) Communes Maison de la société civile Other 26,137 Indicator
Number of under-employed people accessing financial assets, disaggregated by
target groups () women () youth () disabled19 Baseline: () 140 () 935 ()
Target: () 800 () ,300 () TBD Data source: Monitoring reports Frequency of data
collection: Annual Indicator  Under- employment rate Baseline: % (women: %; men:
%) Target: TBD EMICoV Every  years INSAE Indicator  Extent to which integrated
and operational systems are in place for public information on employment20
Baseline:  Target:  Data source: Monitoring reports Frequency of data
collection: Annual Indicator  Per-capita household expenditure growth rate for
the poorest 40% of the population Baseline: Target: TBD Source: INSAE EMICoV,
Human Development Report (HDR) Every  years INSAE Indicator  Number of under-
employed people who found  job (including through business creation),
disaggregated by target groups () women () youth () disabled Communes Agence
nationale pour la promotion de ’emploi 19 Data related to disabilities were not
available for baseline and will be collected during programme implementation 20
=Not adequately; =Very partially; =Partially; =Largely  DP/DCP/BEN/ Agence
nationale des petites et moyennes entreprises National Employment Promotion
Office Centre de partenariat et ’expertise pour le développement Baseline: ()
140 () 935 ()  Target: () 750 () ,950 () TBD Data source: Monitoring reports
Frequency of data collection: Annual Indicator  Index of food insecurity Output
Marginalized groups, particularly underemployed youth and women, have improved
technical capacity to access agricultural technologies adapted to climate change
to improve their livelihoods and productivity Comprehensive food security and
vulnerability analysis report Every  years INSAE Baseline: % (2017 global); %
(2017 urban); 12% (2017 rural) Target: UNDP, UNFPA, UNCDF, UNOPS, UNICEF, FAO,
WFP, International Fund for Agricultural Development, United Nations Environment
Programme, United Nations Industrial Development Organization, ILO,
International Organization for Migration Indicator  Number of beneficiaries of
the programme using agricultural technologies adapted to climate change,
disaggregated by target groups () women () youth () disabled Baseline: () 720 ()
,210 ()  Target: () ,500 () ,500 () TBD () ,500 () ,000 () TBD Data source:
Monitoring reports Frequency of data collection: Annual Source: INSAE Indicator
Proportion of land that is degraded over total land area Baseline: 62% (2017)
Annual national report on climate change Every year Environment and Climate
Office (DGEC) Target: TBD Output  Solutions adopted for rural and urban
populations to achieve access to clean, affordable and sustainable energy GEF,
World Bank, IDB, Colombia, India, Japan Indicator  Renewable energy penetration
rate in the energy mix Baseline: % Target: % Data source: Système ’information
de ’énergie Frequency: Annual (monitoring reports) Indicator  Proportion of
households benefiting from clean, affordable and sustainable energy access: ()
women- headed () in rural areas () in urban and peri-urban areas Baseline: () %
() 14% () 99% Target: () % () % () 10% Data source: EMICoV/Demographic and
health survey/ Multiple indicator cluster survey Frequency: Annual Output
National and local institutions have improved technical and financial capacities
for effective 10 DP/DCP/BEN/ coordination of environmental interventions,
ecosystem protection and disaster risk management Indicator  Extent to which
early warning system is maintained and effective21 Baseline:  Target:  Data
source: Monitoring reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Extent to which
multisector mechanism for sustainable land management is in place and effective
22 Baseline:  Target:  Data source: Monitoring reports Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Percentage of assets lost due to climate change, disaggregated by
target groups () women () youth Baseline: () % () 10%) Target: (() % () %) Data
source: Monitoring reports and HDRs Frequency: Annual National priority or goal:
Pillar  of the PAG – Consolidate democracy, the rule of law and good governance
UNDAF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No  By 2023, Benin’ population have
equal and inclusive access to effective, transparent and accountable
institutions and modern public administration, at all levels, in  climate of
peace and security, particularly related to access to justice respectful of
human rights Related Strategic Plan outcome (, if known): Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development Indicator  Share of population whose
most recent experience with public services has been satisfactory EMICoV Every
years INSAE Output  The Government, Parliament and the National Electoral
Commission (CENA) have improved technical and operational capacities to promote
inclusion, transparency and accountability MJL Ministry of Public Service MPD,
Ministry of Economy and Finance The Supreme Court The Constitutional Court
National Assembly CENA Regular 11,416 Other ,817 Baseline: Target (by sex and
residential environment): Indicator  Number of electoral management bodies with
strengthened capacity to conduct inclusive and credible elections 21 =Not
adequately; =Very partially; =Partially; =Largely 22 =Not adequately; =Very
Partially; =Partially; =Largely 11 DP/DCP/BEN/ Baseline:  Target:  Data source:
CENA Frequency: Annual Nutrition and Food Council (CAN) NGOs Communes Indicator
Share of inmate population awaiting trial Baseline: % (2014) Target (by sex and
age): Administrative/Tribunal de première instance Annual Direction de la
programmation et de la prospective (DPP)/MJL Indicator  Proportion of women ()
candidates in parliamentary and communal elections () in managerial positions in
public administration Baseline: () 10% (2015) () 22% (2016) Target: () 20% () 30
% Data source: CENA, Report of PAG implementation Frequency: Annual Social Watch
Maison de la Société Civile CCIB Indicator  Share of victims of violence in
previous 12 months who reported the facts to competent authorities or other
officially recognized dispute resolution mechanisms Percentage of adult
population aged 18 and older subjected to violence within the last 12 months, by
type (physical, psychological and/or sexual) Governance, peace and security
report Annual Direction générale de la police républicaine, Ministère de
’intérieur et de la sécurité publique, DPP/MJL, INSAE Indicator  Parliament has
improved capacities to undertake inclusive, effective and accountable law-
making, oversight and representation Baseline: No Target: Yes Data source:
Parliament Frequency: Annual UNHCR, UNICEF, UNCDF, ILO, IOM World Bank, IMF,
AfDB, European Union, Canada, German Cooperation, United States of America,
Hanns Seidel Foundation Output  Ministry of Justice (MJL), the Supreme Court,
and national human rights institutions and systems strengthened to expand access
to justice and combat discrimination, with  focus on women and marginalized
groups Baseline: No data Target (by sex, department and disability): Indicator
Existence of strengthened institutions and systems supporting fulfilment of
nationally and internationally ratified human rights obligations: () rule of law
and justice () human rights Baseline: (): No (): No Target: (): Yes () Yes Data
source: MJL Frequency: Annual Ibrahim Index of African Governance Annual UNDP
Indicator : Ibrahim Accountability Index Baseline: /100 (2017) Target: Ibrahim
Index of African Governance Annual UNDP Indicator  Number of people who have
access to justice, disaggregated by sex: (a1) Total (a2) Male (a3) Female
Baseline: (a1) ,473,804 Indicator : Ibrahim Participation and Human Rights Index
Baseline: /100 (2017) Target: (a2) 719,739 12 DP/DCP/BEN/ (a3) 754,065 Target:
(a1) ,000,000 (a2) 976,709 (a3) ,023291 Data source: MJL Frequency: Annual
Output  Ministries in charge of public services and national institutions are
strengthened to use digital technologies and big data for improved public
services and other government functions Indicator  Existence of frameworks that
leverage digital technologies and big data for: () delivery and monitoring of
services () public engagement () legal identity and civil registration
Baseline:(): No (): No () No Target: () Yes () Yes () Yes Data source: Ministry
of public services Frequency: Annually Output  Capacities developed across the
whole of government, including local government, to integrate the 2030 Agenda
and the Paris Agreement into development plans and budgets, and to analyse
progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), using innovative and
data-driven solutions Indicator  Existence of development plans and budgets that
integrate international agreements across the whole of government, including the
local government: () 2030 Agenda () Paris Agreement Baseline: () No () No
Target: () Yes () Yes Data source: Ministry of planning Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Existence of data collection/analysis mechanisms providing
disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the SDGs: Baseline: No Target:
Yes Data source: MPD 13 DP/DCP/BEN/ Frequency: Annual Indicator  Level of
implementation of West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) harmonized
public finance framework reforms Baseline: % Target: 100% Data source: WAEMU
assessment reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Existence of an SDG acceleration
platform to facilitate integrated and innovative solutions Baseline: No Target:
Yes Data source: Ministry of Planning Frequency: Annually Output  National
capacities strengthened for peaceful management of conflict and prevention of
violent extremism in response to national policies and priorities Indicator
National infrastructures for peace established or strengthened, with UNDP
support, upon request Baseline: No Target: Yes Data source: MJL Frequency:
Annual 14