 MAIN DIRECTIONS OF THE STATE POLICY IN ENERGY SECTOR OF GEORGIA   OBJECTIVES OF
THE ENERGY POLICY Main objective of the energy policy is to raise country’
energy security, which serves as  tool for ensuring national interests through
uninterruptable supply of various energy products under acceptable quantity,
quality and price Development and implementation of energy policy is
fundamental prerequisite for achieving strategic goals set forth in the economic
development and energy fields This Energy Policy for Georgia sets out strategic
directions that address the priorities and development opportunities in the
energy sector of Georgia, also considers main directions towards energy security
The policy’ intent is to develop  long-term comprehensive state vision, which
will later become the basis for the development of short, medium and long term
strategies in the energy sector serving as the basis for energy sector programs
and further development of the regulatory legal basis of the sector  ENERGY
POLICY DIRECTIONS The core national energy policy directions include: 
Diversification of supply sources, optimal utilization of local resouces and
reserves the main directions improving national energy security, one of For is
diversification of supply sources and routes for oil, natural gas and
electricity; efficient utilization of local energy potential; and if necessary,
creation of strategic minimum reserves for oil and/or oil products Despite the
scarce natural gas, oil and coal reserves in Georgia, determined quantities
still exist However, vast majority of above-mentioned primary resources remains
largely unexplored Accordingly, exploration of existing reserves and rational
utilization of potential natural resources need to be fully supported Local
demand on electricity shall be satisfied by own energy resources, through
replacing imported energy carriers step by step  Utilization of Georgia’
renewable energy resources Development of renewable resources is  key to
tackling climate change and deploying cleaner sources of energy Georgia is
remarkably rich in hydro-power resources, also having potential of wind, solar,
biomass and geothermal resources, which can be used for creation of additional
capacity by means of domestic and foreign investments To achieve this goal, it
is vital to improve investment climate through creation of stable, transparent
and non-discriminatory legal basis; through deepening strong and stable trading
relations with neighboring countries’ energy markets; through development of
corresponding domestic and cross-border infrastructure; also, through support of
scientific- research (&)activities All of the above will decrease dependence on
imported energy carriers and increase country’ energy security level   Gradual
approximation of Georgia’ framework with the EU’ Energy acquis legislative and
regulatory With the aim of achieving deeper economic and political relations,
gradual approximation of Georgian legislation with the EU legislation is
important The above process will facilitate: competitive, transparent and
effective energy market model as well as creation of attractive and stable
investment climate; development of energy trade between Georgia and EU
countries; utilization of renewable energy resources and facilitation of energy
efficiency oriented activities in the country through economically and
ecologically feasible means With the aim of gradual approximation with EU
legislation, it’ important that consumers, that have metering points acceptable
by existing standards, have an opportunity to purchase electricity from any
supplier Thus, starting from year 2017, consumers shall have right to become
direct consumers, if they satisfy the requirements set by relevant “Grid Codes”
and “ Electricity (capacity) Market Rules”  energy market development and
improvement of energy trading mechanism Competitive market activities represent
the most effective instrument for optimization of supply and demand for natural
gas and electricity, which can be achieved through competitive market conditions
For gradual establishment of competitive energy market and development of
trading relations, the following steps are vital: deepening legal and trading
relations; establishment of strong and transparent institutions; improving
regulatory legal basis;further development of gradual deregulation and technical
synchronization of Georgia’ energy system with the regional energy systems 
Strengthen Georgia’ role as  transit route in the region Georgia is an important
transit country Georgia as  connecting corridor between Europe and Asia, has
potential to strengthen its role in implementation of East-West and North-South
transit projects Effective utilization of its geopolitical location, will
contribute to country’ energy security and economic development  Georgia –
regional platform for generation and trade of clean energy Georgia’ wealth in
existing hydro-resources, corresponding infrastructure and favorable investment
climate enable the country to establish itself as  regional platform for the
generation and trading of clean energy To achieve this goal, it is vital to
continue working on further improvement of legal framework as well as
scientific-research and infrastructure development, to  facilitate utilization
of Georgia’ existing clean energy potential and enable the country to become
regional platform for clean energy trading   Develop and implement an
integrated approach to energy efficiency in Georgia Energy intensity is  key
measure of the country’ economic strength and an important component of
generated product’ competitiveness The above indicator for Georgia remains
higher than the indicators of not just EU member states, but also other
developed countries Decreasing energy intensity through various measures of
demand-side management (DSM) will be  prerequisite to economic growth,
improvement of social conditions and further development Adequate DSM measures
for energy generation, transmission-distribution and consumption as well as
energy efficiency programs, play an important role in optimizing country’ energy
consumption dynamics To facilitate the DSM, an according legislative framework
needs to be created; activities oriented on  development and establishment of
energy efficient technologies and equipment must be planned and implemented; for
energy producers and consumers incentivizing regulation must be created and
established for realization of energy efficiency programs  Taking into
consideration environmental components in the implementation of the energy
projects While implementing energy projects including implementation of large
HPP projects, that might have an environmental and social impact, , it’ vital to
take into consideration best international practices, which include
environmental and social impact assessment, consultations with local population,
information publicity and availability  Improving service quality and
protection of consumer interests Another important direction of the energy
policy is improving the service quality (development/rehabilitation of
transmission and distribution infrastructure and finalization of individual
metering) and protecting the consumer interests In the natural gas and
electricity sectors  significant share is held by natural monopolies Therefore,
it is of particular importance to strengthen the regulatory function of
regulatory bodies, which through consideration of bilateral interests with fair
approach ensures the monitoring of service quality and regulation of relations
between service providers and the consumers With this purpose, new standards for
service quality must be determined and the criteria for their evaluation and
fair rules for service quality monitoring must be determined by the regulatory
authoity  For effective functioning of the energy markets, transparent and fair
tariff levels must be determined Fair tariffs must on the one hand allow the
producer to fully compensate the costs related to service provision, and on the
other hand, protect the consumer to receive high standard services at
transparent and fair costs The government led social programs and targeted
subsidies must ensure uninterrupted supply of energy to vulnerable population In
addition long term, fixed tariffs (including cap tariffs) may be considered for
various types of technically sustainable long consumers, development of energy
system financially and to ensure term,