National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Unofficial Translation
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) (2019–2020)  Table of Contents:
Horizontal measures : Page:   Energy efficiency measures in buildings : Page: 13
Energy efficiency measures in public bodies : Page: 17  Promotion of efficient
heating and cooling : Page:   Energy transformation, transmission, distribution,
and demand response : Page:  National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) ()
List of abbreviations Business As Usual BAU British Petroleum BP Combined Cycle
Gas Turbine CCGT carbon monoxide CO carbon dioxide CO2 carbon dioxide equivalent
CO2eq / CO2eqv Covenant of Mayors CoM Compressed Natural Gas CNG European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development EBRD Energy Efficiency EE Energy Efficiency
Directive EED Energy Efficiency Obligation EEO Greening Economies in the
European Union' Eastern Neighbourhood EaPGREEN Energy Performance Contracting
EnPC Energy Performance in Buildings Directive EPBD Electricity System
Commercial Operator of Georgia ESCO iii National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
(NEEAP) () European Union EU Euro EUR Eastern Europe Energy Efficiency and
Environment Partnership E5P Gross Domestic Product GDP Greenhouse gas GHG
Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission GNERC Georgian
State Electrosystem GSE Hydro-power plant HPP High Intensity Discharge HID
International Finance Corporation IFC International Financial Institute IFI
Internal Rate of Return IRR Intended Nationally Determined Contribution INDC
light-emitting diode LED Low Emission Development Strategy LEDS Local Financial
Institution LFI Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action NAMA The Nordic
Environment Finance Corporation NEFCO National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
NEEAP iv  Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Non-
governmental Organization NGO nitrogen dioxide NO2 Ministry of Economy and
Sustainable Development of Georgia MOESD Ministry of Environmental Protection
and Agriculture MEPA Purchasing Power Parity PPP Resource Efficient and Cleaner
Production RECP Sustainable Energy Action Plan SEAP Small and medium-sized
enterprises SME Sodium discharge lamps SON Thermal Power Plant TPP United
Nations Industrial Development Organization UNIDO United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change UNFCCC United States dollar USD Wind power plant
WPP Dimensions and coefficients kV Kilovolt kV kilowatt-hour kWh kWh MWh =1000
kW =1000 kWh MWh megawatt-hour/   Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
(NEEAP) () GWh =1000 000 kW = 000 000 kWh gigawatt-hour GWh TWh =1000000000 kW
=1000000000 kWh terawatt-hour TWh Mtoe million tonnes of oil equivalent Mtoe
watt  kw =1000  =1000  kilowatt kW mW =1000000  =1000000  megawatt MW kg
kilogram Kg  tonne =1000 kg  =1000 kg kt kiloton =1000000 kg Kt =1000000 kg =
000000000kg mt megaton Mt = 000000000 kg km kilometer km km tonne-kilometer tkm
passkm passenger-kilometer pkm ,085984523 The tonne of oil equivalent TOE per
MWh per Megawatt hour ,02388459 The tonne of oil equivalent TOE per GJ: per
gigajoules ,277777778 megawatt hours per MWh per GJ gigajoules vi  Co Ltd
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () ,859845228 Gigacalories per
megawatt Gcal per MWh hours ,7206 Gel per EUR GEL per EUR ,092 USD per EUR USD
per EUR vii  Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Executive
Summary This document sets out Georgia’ First National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan (NEEAP) which establishes  set of investment and policy measures to be
carried out in the coming period (2019- 2020) which can last up to 2022 year The
aim of NEEAP is at optimizing and reducing the use of energy resources as
compared to  Business As Usual (BAU) scenario The NEEAP has been developed in
order to assist in meeting  number of strategic goals of Georgia, including: ;
Setting out energy savings targets for the coming  year period and beyond in
order to: Improve competitiveness   Reduce the needs for import of energy
Reduce greenhouse gas emissions in  way that is consistent with Georgia’
commitments, such as the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submission to
the UNFCCC in 2015; ; Providing  signal to the international and national
community on energy efficiency priorities and plans ; Laying out  roadmap for
implementation of priority measures – including development of the EE Law ;
Reporting on the plans for implementation of the EU’ Energy Efficiency Directive
(EED - 2012/EU) which Georgia has committed to under the EU – Georgia
Association Agreement and also by signing up to the Energy Community This
document is  summary of the full NEEAP report It lays out targets for savings of
primary energy consumption1 as well as policy and investment measures to achieve
these targets Measures described include: ) those already underway; )
thosecommitted by various international agreements; ) those being planned for
implementation in the coming years which are in-line with national priorities
The measures are sorted by the following categories:  Horizontal measures which
impact more than one sector ( public and private) and / or are consistent with
horizontal measures as laid out by the EU’ guidance on developing NEEAPs ;
Building measure in private commercial and residential buildings; ;  Public
sector measures which will be carried out at the level of central and non-
central government ;  Industry sector measures which include  information
gathering and various investment types of measures, which are also related to
the horizontal measures;  Primary energy consumption measures the total energy
demand of  country It covers consumption of the energy sector itself, losses
during transformation (for example, from oil or gas into electricity) and
distribution of energy, and the final consumption by end users   Co Ltd National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () ; Transport sector measures; ;  Energy
sector measures related to energy transformation, transmission, and distribution
sub- sectors According to calculations developed for the NEEAP, in 2020 the
implementation of the measures mentioned above could lead to % of energy saving
in primary energy sources and % in final energy consumption In 2025 it could
lead to 13% in primary energy sources and % in final energy consumption; In 2030
- 14% in primary energy sources and 11% in final energy consumption, compared to
the BAU scenario Those energy-saving measures can have an important contribution
to the targets set by Georgian Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) In
December 2015, Georgia determined the fulfilling of this commitment on
COP21Paris conference of the parties for United Nations Framework Convention of
the Climate Change  It is also noteworthy, that out of the measures defined
within the NEEAP: ;  of them considers the implementation of large public and
private sector investments The implementation is already planned by the
Government / private sector; ;  measures are under development stage, which
envisages the policy introduction in different directions; ;  measures envisage
introduction of policy directions, committed by the accession of Georgia to the
Energy Community Treaty/ signing the Association Agreement (AA) with EU / EU; ;
Implementation of 21 measures which envisages policy introduction at the
municipal level and relevant investment realizations, are not yet committed; ;
of them are policy measures targeting mostly private sector The process of
designing the NEEAP involved significant interaction and consultation with
stakeholders, including: ; Contact with over 100 national-level, municipal,
Government and international stakeholders of which the vast majority of them
provided inputs into the NEEAP in some way; ;  total of over 50 people attended
workshops carried out for discussions of the NEEAP draft ; Written comments
provided by 25 different stakeholders on the NEEAP Overview of Georgian energy
situation Currently Georgian energy sector, energy policy and regulatory
framework is in  state of active reforms and development It should be noted
that, in order to regulate field of energy efficiency several draft law are
prepared, draft law on Energy Efficiency, draft law on Energy Performance of
Buildings and draft law on Energy Labelling, (draft law on Energy Performance of
Buildings and draft law on Energy Labelling are submitted to the Parliament of
Georgia) Once those are in force, legal base for the mandatory implementation of
the targetedmeasures defined by NEEAP will be established Reforms are
particularly influenced by the Association Agreement signed with the European
Union in June Under the Agreement, Georgia took an obligation of implementing
the EU directives in energy   Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
(NEEAP) () sector and will have to comply with the requirements of the third
energy package Georgia joined the Energy Community as  Contracting Party in July
Based on energy balance dataof 2017, fossil fuels accounted 73% of primary
energy consumption in Georgia Almost entire domestic supply of fossil fuels
(98%) are imported from neighbouring countries, which means that energy security
and independence are significant challenges for the country – especially since
there are strained relationships within the region Moreover, the situation has
also been exacerbated by  tendency of an increase in fossil fuels consumption in
recent years (Figure1 and figure ), Which leads to an increase in imports The
largest increase can be seen/observed in natural gas imports Energy consumption
by fuel  yearsTOE 2000 1500 1000 500  2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 coal oil products
Natural gas Geothermal, solar and etc Biofuel and waste Electricity Figure :
Graphical representation of final energy consumption according to fuel
categories – 2013 and 2017 Share of economic sectores in energy balance Industry
Figure : Share of economic sectors in energy consumption Transport %%% 16%
Private and state services Households Source: GeoStat (2018) Energy balance of
Georgia,2017 30% 32% Agriculture, forestry and fish cultures Other 10% Even
though compared to other countries, Georgian the economy does not have much
energy intensive industry Its GDP intensity is still much higher than, for
instance, in Turkey, whose economic structure (industrial For non-energy
purposes  European Union (30 August 2014) Association Agreement between the
European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States,
of the one part, and Georgia, of the other part Official Journal of the European
Union L261/ Available at    Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
(NEEAP) () sector) is characterized by high rate of energy use This indicates
that there is potential for energy efficiency improvements in Georgia Overview
of national energy efficiency targets Georgia’ indicative national energy
efficiency targets for 2020, are laid out/shown in Table  The table also
outlines expected results of the planned activities for 2025 and 2030,as an
additional indicative target period That target can be reached by implementing
all measures of the NEEAP The given targets are symbolic and are not legally
binding Table : Georgia’ indicative energy efficiency targets for 2020, 2025,
and 2030 Compared to the Business As Usual (BAU) Scenario Year 2014 2020 2025
2030 Primary Energy (GWh) Final energy (GWh) Primary Energy (GWh) Primary Energy
(GWh) Primary Energy (GWh) Final energy (GWh) Final energy (GWh) Final energy
(GWh) Category Business as Usual (BAU) Savings from measures With measures %
energy reduction from the BAU 54,894 46,758 63,185 57,426 85,542 70,201 101,810
83,710 - - ,455 ,588 10,856 ,167 14,584 ,253 54,894 46,758 57,729 54,838 74,687
64,034 87,226 74,457 % % % % 13% % 14% 11% Note: Figures for energy consumption
in 2014 come from Geostat’ Energy Balance (published in 2015) The final energy
consumption figures for 2014 do not include 27 GWh of non-energy use consumption
of oil products in the energy sector AsTable  shows energy efficiency measures
described in this NEEAP would have  significant impact on Georgia’ energy
consumption The BAU scenario was developed using MARKAL modelling software using
inputs developed by the Georgian Government as part of the LEDS project
Assumptions underlying the Business As Usual scenario are as follows: ; The
current population is assumed to be ,720,400 people3 – and would remain constant
at this level ; GDP growth is projected to be % annually through ; Per capita
GDP is projected to grow from ~EUR ,450 in 2015 to ~EUR ,660 in ; The number of
households is projected to remain steady at 955,000 by ; The number of families
by 2030 will remain the same - 955 000; ; Growth of energy electricity
consumption in industry is projected to grow by % per year by See Geostat (2016)
Population:    Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () The
impact on energy consumption has been calculated through the use of individual
models for each measure – wherein  BAU case was developed in terms of final
energy consumption and primary energy consumption, and then the energy
efficiency case was developed which entailed  number of potential changes
including: Use of renewable energy technologies, instead of technologies working
on traditional, primary energy sources and energy carriers – such as full or
partially switching from electricity to solar resources for hot water heating
As  result, there is no change of final energy demand, but there is savings of
primary energy sources( which is consumed to create electricity) Improvement of
energy distribution / transmission / transformation efficiencies – such as
reducing electricity losses or natural gas losses on their networks, or
improving the efficiency of natural-gas fired power plants by switching to
combined-cycle plantsImproving the efficiency of end-use equipment – such as
introducing efficient lighting, efficient wood-stoves, improving the efficiency
of vehicles, use of efficient pumps, boilers and etc in industry and other
sectors ; ; Switching to more efficient transport means – such as switching from
personal cars to buses or metros This also involves the shift of freight
transportation from heavy goods vehicles to railways; Reduction of end-user
demand – such as reduction of heating losses in building envelopes, reduction in
the use of internal-combustion-engine vehicles (ICEV) , improving maintenance of
industrial firms, etcThe targets for measures were calculated based considering
EE market potentialas much as possible Also, – with certain assumptions made
regarding the market penetration levels or levels of investment which would
occur These are described in details for each measure in the full NEEAP document
The dates of 2020, 2025, and 2030 as the target dates were chosen to be
consistent with the planning horizon of the EU and Energy Community – as well as
with Georgia’ Intended Nationally Determined Contribution for reduction of
greenhouse gases  The achievement of the indicative targets of this NEEAP is
particularly dependent on three factors:  The implementation of an ambitious
policy agenda for energy efficiency:  Implementation of an overall project
identification, technical assistance, and grant distribution scheme by the
Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia (-)  Incentivizing
energy efficiency in industry (-)  In buildings, implementation of the EPBD
including energy audit rules (-) and building up energy auditors’ expertise (-)
In industry, building up knowledge and capacity amongst decision-makers on
energy efficiency issues (-), adopting energy audit rules and assisting increase
of expertise amongst energy auditors (-)  The introduction of energy efficient
public procurement practices (-)   regulatory mechanism to increase the share of
the market for efficient light bulbs (- , - and investments in industry ); and
technical inspection programme of vehicles (-)  The availability of technical
assistance for implementation: Many measures are contingent upon the
availability of technical assistance within the various sub-sectors in planning
energy efficiency investments  The availability of investment funds for
implementation of projects: The availability of lending funds at  reasonable
rate and grants for implementation of measures Figure  shows the /distribution
of the amount of energy savings per sector while Figure  shows the percentage
breakdown of energy savings according to sectors It should be noted that the
savings are fairly well spread across the sectors, with the energy sector and
transport sectors having  large impact on   Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan (NEEAP) () savings Savings targets were not calculated for some
horizontal measures, as their impact will be mostly related to stimulation of
energy efficiency development and investments in other sectors Primary energy
savings targets - 2020 to 2030 (GWh) Energy transformation, transmission,
distribution, and demand response measures 5179 Transport sector measures 4741
Industry sector measures 4377 Public sector measures 2844 3537 1190 1665 374 744
231 1298 Building sector measures 3288 614 221 2020 Horizontal measures 78 2030
2025 Figure : Primary energy savings according to sector for 2020, 2025, and
2030 (GWh)   Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Primary
energy savings targets - 2020 to 2030 (%) 100% 90% 35% 80% 42% 43% 70% 60% 50%
31% 32% 40% 36% 30% 18% 20% 13% % 13% % % 10% % 13% % % % % 2020 % 2025 2030
Figure : Primary energy savings targets in percentage for 2020, 2025, and 2030
(%) The Table  below shows the key priority policy measures planned as part of
the NEEAP – which are directly related to facilitating investment in EE and also
to implementation of measures reflected in  -year long DCFTA Action Plan The
most critical measures as far as energy saving and /or facilitation of
investments have  light blue background Table  No Title of the energy saving
measure 2019 2020 2021 2022 Horizontal measures to be implemented by the
Ministry - Alternative policy measures - Financing schemes for energy efficiency
Alternative policy measures – Training and education, including energy advisory
programmes - - Consumer information programmes and training - Public awareness -
Information campaign for transport - Alternative policy measures – Incentivising
/ mandating energy efficiency in industry   Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan (NEEAP) () - Energy audits and management systems, boiler
inspections in the industry sector* Public sector and Building policy measures -
Standards and norms and labelling schemes in appliances* - Qualification,
accreditation, and certification schemes – Buildings* EPBD Transposition and
Enforcement: Standards and norms and energy performance certification schemes in
buildings* Regulations leading to improved efficient lighting systems in
residential and commercial buildings Develop  national energy efficiency
information system for publicly owned buildings - - - - Energy efficient
procurement** Transport sector policy measures - Vehicle improvement - Mandatory
periodic roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles - Vehicle improvement -
Increase of hybrid and electric vehicles** Primary Energy sector policy measures
- Policies and investments to rehabilitate hydropower assets - Optimization of
reserves and seasonal operational regimes Regulations on the rules of
calculation of normative electricity losses - stimulating investments**
Regulations on the rules of calculation of normative natural gas pipeline losses
- stimulating investments** - - Policy development and adoption Policy
implementation Priority measures for energy saving / facilitation of market
development * Policy required as part of Energy Community Membership / EU
accession ** Policies already in place   Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan (NEEAP) () Measures implementing the EED This section is aimed at
bringing together information on all important energy efficiency measures
planned to be adopted in Georgia to implement the EU’ Energy Efficiency
Directive (EED - 2012/EU) The analysis and presentation of the measures planned
for the NEEAP was developed by Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development
with the assistance of  consortium of local and international experts
Significant inputs from  variety of national-level and municipal stakeholders
have been incorporated into the action plan Overall responsibility for the
implementation and monitoring of the NEEAP is on the Government of Georgia
number of other national and sub-national entities (including municipalities)
will play  significant role as well These are outlined in detail within the
description of the measures in the full NEEAP document The section below
outlines the measures planned broken down by the sector impacted – as consistent
with EU guidance for NEEAP development  Horizontal measures  Energy efficiency
obligation scheme / alternative measures Article  of the EED requires EU member
states to set up an energy efficiency obligation (EEO) scheme or to achieve the
same amount of savings with alternative measures The EEO scheme requires energy
distribution companies to achieve energy savings of at least % of annual sales
to final consumers For Energy Community Contracting Parties, the target for EEOs
was set at % each year from  January 2019 to 31 December 2022   country can opt
to introduce the above % target gradually (, % in 2019 and 2020;  % in 2021 and
2022), and such and other alternative calculation measures should notify to
Energy Community Secretariat by the end of In order to achieve above mentioned
target, as  result of consultations, Georgian government has opted to implement
alternative policy measures, To achieve this, implementing capital investments
and  number of technical measures in various sectors of the economy will be
needed Therefore, the EEO target will not be used for Georgia’ NEEAP Instead of
implementing an EEO scheme, Georgia plans to implement  set of alternative
policy measures linked with technical/financial measures which reduce final
energy consumption As an alternative (or supplement) to setting up an energy
efficiency obligation scheme, the Article  of EED allows to take other policy
measures to achieve energy savings among final consumers ; The alternative
measures included in Georgia’ first NEEAP are as follows: Financing schemes for
energy efficiency (-) Incentivising /mandatingng energy efficiency in industry
(-) ; ; Training and education, including energy advisory programmes (-) ;
Standards and norms and labelling schemes in appliances (-) The above measures
will not achieve direct savings equivalent to the impact of the EEO scheme,
however they will make it possible to achieve savings through the specific
technical/investment measures described  This measure is linked to Directive
2010/EU Even though Georgia is not yet an EU Member State, it is  Contracting
Party to the Energy Community Therefore, for classification purposes the measure
is considered as an “Alternative Policy Measure” for this NEEAP   Co Ltd
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () later in this section It is
possible to achieve more savings through implementation of sector-specific
measures than through implementation of an EEO schemeAdditional Horizontal
measures include: ; Qualification, accreditation, and certification schemes in
Buildings impacting the buildings and public sector (-) ; Qualification,
accreditation, and certification schemes in industry (-) ; Energy audits and
management system, as well as boiler inspection requirements for large
industrial companies (-) ; Consumer information programmes and training (-) ;
EPBD Transposition and Enforcement: Standards and norms and energy performance
certification schemes in buildings impacting the buildings and public sector (-)
Table : Overview of individual horizontal measures Required financing in the
coming period () Title of the energy saving measure Type of financing No
Implementing body Source Total 2019 - 2020 2019 2020 Central Government
IFIs/Banks - Investment In-kind TBD TBD TBD Alternative policy measures -
Financing schemes for energy efficiency Initially Ministry of Economy and
Sustainable Development Grants TBD TBD TBD - Total Central Government
Industry/Private companies In-kind €  € 79,000 € 79,000 Alternative policy
measures – Incentivising / mandating energy efficiency in industry Ministry of
Economy and Sustainable Development In-kind and investment €  € ,361,000 €
,361,000 - € ,440,000 € ,440,000 Total €  Ministry of Economy and Sustainable
Development in cooperation with other relevant entities, donors/ IFIs Central
Government Alternative policy measures – Training and education, including
energy advisory programmes €  €  €  In-kind - Total €  €  €  Ministry of Economy
and Sustainable Development in cooperation with other relevant entities Central
Government Private Sector In-kind € 13,000 € 91,000 € 104,000 Standards and
norms and labelling schemes in appliances - Investment €  €  €  Total € 13,000 €
91,000 € 104,000 Central Government In-kind € 138,000 € 133,000 € 271,000
Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development in close cooperation with
training institutions and other relevant entities Qualification, accreditation,
and certification schemes - Buildings - € 138,000 Total € 133,000 € 271,000
Qualification, accreditation, and Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Central
Government - In-kind € 138,000 € 133,000 € 271,000 10  Co Ltd National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () certification schemes - Industry Development
in close cooperation with training institutions and other relevant entities €
138,000 Total € 133,000 € 271,000 Central Government Industry/Private companies
In-kind € 38,000 € 39,000 € 77,000 Ministry of Economy and Sustainable
Development in cooperation with other relevant entities Energy audits and
management systems, boiler inspections in the industry sector - Investment €
83,000 € 413,000 € 496,000 € 121,000 Total € 452,000 € 573,000 Central
Government In-kind €  € 756,000 € 756,000 Ministry of Economy and Sustainable
Development in cooperation with other relevant entities (possibly
Municipalities), donors/ IFIs Consumer information programmes and training
Municipalities In-kind €  € 200,000 € 200,000 - Total €  € 956,000 € 956,000
Central Government Real estate developers/ building owners In-kind € 25,000 €
130,000 € 155,000 EPBD Transposition and Enforcement: Standards and norms and
energy performance certification schemes in buildings Ministry of Economy and
Sustainable Development in cooperation with other relevant entities Investment €
€ ,377,000 € ,377,000 - Municipalities In-kind € 25,000 € 25,000 € 50,000 €
,532,000 € ,582,000 Total € 50,000 € 460,000 € 18,737,000 € 19,197,000 Total 11
Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) ()  Energy Services
Information on measures related to energy performance contracting (EnPC) and
energy services are not yet applicable as the market does not exist – nor are
there concrete plans to promote them yet Based upon analysis carried out in
preparation of this NEEAP, the scope for the potential market for Energy
Performance Contracting are as follows related to specific sectors in which
EnPCs are common: ; Industry: There is  large market potential for EnPC
implementation in the industrial sector, with potentially over EUR 200 million
in investment opportunities available with IRRs over 30% However, there are
significant market barriers which would inhibit the growth of such  market –
notably lack of awareness of savings opportunities, and lack of stability within
the industry sector leading to risk-averse behaviour related to capital
investments ( industries are not willing to invest or implement energy
efficiency measures due to concern about the basic health of the business)Public
sector buildings: There is limited scope for EnPC implementation in the public
building sector due mostly to low IRRs related to heating of buildings
(typically  – 10% at  maximum) This is primarily due to low energy consumption
in existing buildings and low energy prices – particularly natural gas ; Public
sector lighting: There is  large market potential for EnPC implementation in
public sector lighting – with potentially over EUR 90 million in investment
required and typical IRRs of over 30% Specific steps will need to be taken to
establish this market The types of companies which could provide these services
include national engineering and construction firms – likely linked with
international firms interested in the Georgian market An additional potential
implementing company could be the energy distribution companies – who could set
up separate companies to implement energy efficiency measures via an EnPC
modality Actions which should / could be taken to develop the market for energy
services in Georgia include: ; Addressing specific regulatory and non-regulatory
barriers – Review of public procurement legislation issues (see - – Energy
Efficient Public Procurement); ; Development and publication of model contracts
for energy services providers and best practices for energy performance
contracting; ; Assignment of  national point of contact to provide consumers
with information on energy services; ; Development of an independent mechanism
such as an ombudsman to ensure the handling of complaints on energy service
contracts; ; Steps to enable independent market intermediaries to play  role in
stimulating market development of the demand and supply sides; and ; Steps to
ensure that energy distributors, distribution system operators and retail energy
sales companies refrain from activities that may impede the demand for and
delivery of energy services, or hinder the development of markets for such
services  An EnPC is  partnership between an organisation (the client) and an
energy service company (ESCO) The ESCO conducts  comprehensive energy audit for
the facility and identifies improvements to save energy The ESCO then designs
and carries out the project interventions that meets the client’ needs and the
ESCO also arranges the necessary financing The ESCO guarantees that the
improvements will generate energy cost savings sufficient to pay for the project
over the term of the contract The client then continues to pay energy bills at
the same (or equivalent) rate for  certain period of time to the ESCO – which
makes  profit off of the difference in energy costs which it pays and the income
which it receives from the client (minus investment costs) After the contract
ends, all additional cost savings accrue to the client 12  Co Ltd National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () In addition to those Horizontal
measures describe above, in the coming period, Georgia also plans to undertake
the following activities/measures to encourage energy efficiency: ; Defining
changes in existing regulations for simplifying investments in multi-family
apartment buildings ; Improving public procurement regulations (See measure -
Energy efficient procurement); and ; Transposing the EU’ Energy Performance in
Buildings directive in the coming years (see - below)  Energy efficiency
measures in buildings Policy and investment measures linked together and are
closely connected to to buildings and to public bodies This is because public
sector measures are often linked to EE in buildings and also because the policy
framework bringing about investments in the private building sector and public
sector are closely linked  Addressing the requirements of the recast EPBD
(2010/EU) In 2014 the EU and Georgia signed the Association Agreement (AA), The
Association Agreement recognizes Georgia’ commitment to implementing and
promoting energy efficiency in the buildings sector under the EPBD Georgia is
obligated to align its national laws with the EU legislation and is at the
beginning of the EPBD transposition process Support for reforms in the field of
energy outlined in the EU-Georgian Association Agreement for building sector
improvement is currently being planned within the framework of the Danish
Neighbourhood Program launched by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark and
Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia as well as with the
Energy Community supported technical assistance under EU4 Energy entitled “Gap
analysis of Georgian legislation in relation to energy performance of buildings
and development of Draft Energy Performance of Buildings Law”  Building
renovation strategy The EED requires that the NEEAP present  long-term strategy
for mobilising investment in the renovation of buildings and that it is included
in the NEEAP However, there is currently no national building renovation
strategy in place and very limited information on the sector available (in
particular, on the building stock)Public sector buildings The inventory of the
building stock in Georgia is not available and thus providing reliable
information on the entire public building stock will not be possible Related to
fuels used, electricity is used for lighting, appliances, and cooling The
typical fuels used for Central Government buildings are natural gas for heat,
and some electric space heaters Central, District heating is not used Non-
Central Government buildings represent  large part of public buildings In
Georgia there is not yet an inventory of public buildings and their energy
performance – nor have minimum energy performance requirements been established
Information on public buildings not owned and occupied by the Central Government
is partially available based on the SEAPs developed by specific municipalities –
Tbilisi, Kutaisi, Batumi, Rustavi, Zugdidi, Gori, and Telavi Additionally,
information on schools is available from the Ministry of Education, Science,
Culture and Sport of Georgia  It is likely that schools, kindergartens, and
administrative buildings are the predominant type of public building not owned
and occupied by the Central Government ; Schools heat using  mix mostly of
natural gas and wood logs with some electricity as followsTotal number of
schools: ,200 13  Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () ;
Total number of schools with central heating – electricity: 72 ; Total number of
schools with heating – natural gas: 536 ; Total number of schools with heating –
wood: 377 ; Total number of schools with unknown heating source – ,215
Technologies typically used in other publicly-owned building are natural gas
boilers, natural gas space heaters for smaller spaces, electricity based air
conditioning/heating units, and highly inefficient wood stoves for area heating
There are number of barriers complicating the wide implementation of energy
efficiency in this sub-sector The most important are: ; Lack of pipeline of good
energy efficiency projects ; No legal requirements about the minimum energy
performance ; An absence of incentives for implementing agents (administrators)
; Lack of Awareness of options and impacts Commercial sector buildings – private
There is no official information on private commercial buildings sector It is
noteworthy that most hospitals and medical centres are privately owned The
typical fuels used in these buildings varies, but in general, natural gas is
used for heating in more urban areas, while wood (and sometimes electricity) is
used in more rural areas Energy consumption in these buildings is not generally
known in any systematic way – though some energy audits have been conducted for
hospitals/medical centres and large supermarkets and generally have high energy
consumption ( Specific heating and hot water demand of 250 kWh/m2 in hospitals)
There are severe data limitations in this sector, so development of the building
stock will be an important first step in developing  strategy Special features
in energy consumption for the private commercial buildings sector include: ;
significant amount of under-heated buildings meaning there is suppressed demand;
; Very poor energy properties of the external building envelopes; ; The use of
inefficient wood or electric space heaters in many instances which only heat
parts of the buildings Key barriers to investment are mostly related to finance
and awareness of potential energy savings from implementing measures Residential
sector buildings There is no official information on residential buildings
sector related to area, number of dwellings, or number of buildings The results
of the recently carried out census will likely have information on the
residential sector It is noteworthy that the vast majority of residential
buildings are privately owned by the families living in them The typical fuels
used in these buildings varies, but in general, natural gas is used for heating
in more urban areas, while wood is used in more rural areas Energy consumption
in these buildings is not generally known in any systematic way – though some
energy audits have been conducted which show that they generally have high
energy consumption ( Specific heating demand of 200 kWh/m2 in houses and 170
kWh/m2 in apartments) There are severe data limitations in this sector, so
development of the building stock will be an important first step in developing
strategy 14  Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Special
features in energy consumption for the residential buildings sector include: ;
significant amount of under-heated buildings meaning there is suppressed demand
This is particularly prevalent amongst single houses; ; Very poor energy
properties of the external building envelopes; ; The use of inefficient wood,
electric, or natural gas space heaters in many instances which only heat parts
of the buildings Key barriers to investment are mostly related to finance and
awareness of potential energy savings from implementing measures It should also
be noteworthy, that the survey on energy consumption in household sector was
conducted by the National Statistics Office of Georgia in 2017 with the
methodological support of Energy Institute of Croatia The survey gives detailed
picture in terms of energy efficiency of households It’ planned, that the same
survey should be conducted once per  years Steps in the coming -year period to
develop  strategy In the coming -year period, the following steps should be
carried out to develop  full strategy for improvement of energy efficiency in
the building sector:  Adoption of the legislative framework and it’
harmonization with European directives;  Define upon reference building types to
be examined  Establish  system for tracking the inventory of buildings This
should be linked to Measure - Develop  national energy efficiency information
system for publicly owned buildings  Conduct energy audits and building
inventories for the various sub-sectors throughout the country – first of all,
focus should be made on the cities (in particular, municipalities, which are the
signatories to the Covenant of Mayors) Energy audits can be conducted and filed
as  part of training programmes under -: Qualification, accreditation, and
certification schemes - Buildings When an energy audit is performed as  part of
training course, it can be filed in the national energy information system In
parallel to these steps, there should be an energy efficiency programme set up
for the various sub- sectors which stimulate investment in each of them Energy
audits and lessons learned as  part of these  Multiple surveys in various parts
of Georgia have been carried out related to this topic, including: SDAP (2013)
Technical Report 21: Energy Analysis of Lower Alazani-Iori Pilot Watershed Area
(Dedoplistskaro Municipality, Kakheti Region) SDAP (2013) Technical Report 22:
Energy Analysis of Lower Rioni Pilot Watershed Area (Khobi and Senaki
Municipalities, Samegrelo and Zemo Svaneti region) SDAP (2013) Technical Report
23: Energy Analysis of Upper Alazani Pilot Watershed Area (Akhmeta and Telavi
Municipalities, Kakheti Region) SDAP (2013) Technical Report 24: Energy Analysis
of Upper Rioni Pilot Watershed Area (Ambrolauri and Oni Municipalities, Racha-
Lechkhumi and Kvemo Svaneti region) and VTT (2016) Market Assessment of the
Residential Sector in Georgia: Policy, Legal, Regulatory, Institutional,
Technical and Financial Considerations (Phase ) 15  Co Ltd National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () investments can be filed with the national
energy information system Particular measures which can be implemented in
parallel to data-gathering include: ; -: Regulations leading to improved
efficient lighting systems in residential and commercial buildings ; -: Pilot
project for low energy public sector buildings ; -: Efficient lighting systems
in public buildings ; -: Improvement of the energy efficiency in schools ; -:
Improvement of the energy efficiency of non-central government-owned public
buildings - kindergartens The following additional measures, which haven’ been
considered within the NEEAP but can be revisited in the coming years, are: ; ; ;
Improvement of energy efficiency in existing private houses Improvement of
energy efficiency in multi-family apartment buildings Improvement of the energy
efficiency in existing commercial buildings - considers energy saving measures,
replacement of inefficient incandescent light bulbs or other Halogen lamps with
high-efficient models, like fluorescent or LED bulbs The implementation of the
said measure is possible by adoption of the relevant regulations Table
Describes approximate assumptions regarding the cost of implementing the
measures 16  Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Required
financing in the coming period Title of the energy saving measure Type of
financing # Implementing body Source Total 2019 - 2020 2019 2020 Central
Government € 13000 € 6000 € 19000 Non-financial Regulations to improve the
efficiency of lighting systems in residential and commercial buildings Ministry
of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia Household Sector Investment €
€ 3382000 € 3382000 -  Commercial Sector Investment €  € 753000 € 753000 Total:
€ 13000 € 4141000 €  154 000 Total: € 13000 € 4141000 €  154 000  Energy
efficiency measures in public bodies  number of measures defined for the public
sector are mandatory and recommended to implement as part of the EED As per the
Energy Community’ adoption of the EED, Contracting Parties to the Energy
Community must ensure that, as from  December 2017, % of the total floor area of
heated and/or cooled buildings owned and occupied by their central government is
renovated each year to meet at least the minimum energy performance requirements
set out in the recast EPBD Georgia has  commitment to carry out renovations on %
of the public building stock each year starting from However, the number of
buildings and useful floor area are not yet known in Georgia Additionally, the
national minimum energy performance requirements have not been established Based
on some assumptions, the NEEAP expert team estimates that % of the total area
would be ,446 m2 to be renovated per year While this number is indicative, it
does provide  sense of scale of the needs for renovation to comply with the
Energy Community requirements The NEEAP includes  number of measures related to
central Government-owned buildings to: ; The development of National Energy
efficiency information system for public buildings/Evaluate current energy
consumption and potential savings (-) Implement  pilot project (-) Implement EE
lighting in all public buildings as replacements become necessary (-)
Improvement of Energy efficiency in public buildings(-) ; ; ; The EED also
requires that public bodies that are not owned and occupied by the central
government should be encouraged to demonstrate their exemplary role in buildings
energy efficiency Measures to be implemented related to this sub-sector involve
EE measures in schools (-) kindergartens (-) and in other non-central
Government-owned buildings (-) In addition, The EEDrequires that central
governments purchase products, services and buildings with high-energy
efficiency performance and that all public bodies should be encouraged to do
likewise Green 17  Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) ()
public procurement leads the market by example, by creating demand of EE goods,
reducing the market prices, enhancing the sustainability and diversity of the
market for EE goods and services The implementation of this measure is included
in measure - An additional measure which is in the public sector but not related
to buildings is improvement of efficiency in street-lighting / outdoor lighting
The measure is to be carried out in: Tbilisi, Kutaisi, Batumi, Rustavi, Zugdidi,
Gori, Telavi, and potentially others To some extent, this measure is already
underway in  number of the municipalities, but will be scaled up Additionally,
lighting improvements can be made for inter-city roads Table  describes
approximate assumptions regarding the cost of implementing the measures 18  Co
Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Required financing in the
coming period Title of the energy saving measure Type of financing Implementing
body Source # Total 2019 2020 2019 - 2020 Central Government Non- financial €
13000 € 6000 of Economy and Ministry for Sustainable Development elaboration of
System Ministry of Regional Development and the coordination and obtainment of
the the Municipalities €19 000 the Develop  national energy efficiency
information system for publicly owned buildings  -  Infrastructure for Non-
financial Municipalities € 48 000 € 122 000 € 170 000 information from Total: €
61 000 € 128 000 € 189,000 Central Government Non- financial € 12 000 €  € 12
000 Municipal administration – After getting information on results, they are
spread to the various Municipalities and Public institutions (Ministry of
Economy and Sustainable Development) the Pilot project for low energy public
sector buildings  -  Donors-Grants Grants € 35 000 €  € 35 000 Total: € 47000 €
€ 47000 Central Government Investment € 25 000 € 78 000 of Economy and Ministry
Sustainable Development - the buildings owned by the Public Institutions €
103,000 Efficient lighting systems in public buildings  -  Municipalities
Investment € 13 000 € 41 000 € 54 000 Total: € 157 000 € 38 000 € 119 000
Improvement of the energy efficiency in central government- owned public
buildings Central Government Non- financial € 13000 € 13000 The Ministries,
which use specific buildings - Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development
-  €26 000 Investment € ,000,000 NEFCO €  500 000 € 1500 000 19  Co Ltd National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Required financing in the coming period
Title of the energy saving measure Type of financing Implementing body Source #
Total 2019 2020 2019 - 2020 Grants E5P €  000 000 €  000 000 € ,000,000 Total: €
,026,000 €  513 000 €  513 000 Central Government Non- financial € 19 000 € 20
000 € 39 000 Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sport Improvement of
the energy efficiency in public schools  -  Grants E5P €  207 000 €  231 000
€,438,000 Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure IFIs/Banks
Investment €  €  Total: € ,477,000 € 1226000 € 1251000 Non- financial
Municipalities € 63 000 € 62000 € 125 000 Improvement of the energy efficiency
of non-central government-owned public buildings - kindergartens IFI/Banks-
Investment Municipalities with the assistance of international organizations
Investment € 490 000 €   -  490000 € Total: € 62000 € 553000 615000 Central
Government Non- financial € 6000 € 6000 € 120 00 Improvement of the energy
efficiency of non-central government-owned public buildings - non- kindergartens
Municipalities with the assistance Regional of Development and Infrastructure  -
Non- financial Municipalities € 62000 € 63000 Ministry of € 125 000 Total: €
68000 € 69000 € 137 000 State Procurement Agency with the Ministry of Economy
and Sustainable Development for elaboration of the procedures regarding
procurement  -  Energy efficient procurement Central Government Non- financial €
25000 € 496000 € 521,000 20  Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
(NEEAP) () Required financing in the coming period Title of the energy saving
measure Type of financing Implementing body Source # Total 2019 2020 2019 - 2020
Also the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure will be involved in
terms of implementation with the local Public authorities Non- financial € 26000
Municipalities €  € 26000 Total: € 25000 € 522000 €547,000 Central Government
Non- financial € 6000 € 6000 € 120 00 Municipalities and Ministry of and
Regional Infrastructure with the assistance of donors/IFI the increasing of the
competence of the implementing agencies for supporting the implementation of the
process Non- financial Development Municipalities € 102 000 € 35000 Improvement
of efficiency in street- lighting/outdoor lighting € 137,000  -  regarding
IFI/Banks- Investment Investment €  €  145 000 €  145 000 Total: € 108 000 €
186 000 € ,294,000 Total: € 18,489,000 €  148 000 € 14 341 000 21  Co Ltd
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) ()  Energy efficiency measures in
industry  Characteristics of industry in Georgia Georgian industrial sector is
not  large consumer of energy However, the TWh of energy consumed in industry in
2014 (for both energy and non-energy use) represents 22% of finalenergy consumed
in Georgia that year Historically, Georgia was  much larger energy consumer;
Industrial sector consumed nearly  times more energy in 1990 than in
2013/However, there it has been  large reduction of industrial (and other
sectors) development since 1990, after the break-up of the Soviet Union Ministry
of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia developed the MARKAL model,,
that predicts annual growth of energy consupmtion (94% per year) in , , that is
– directly linked to GDP growth While the preparation of NEEAP the MARKAL
projected growth figures have been used This level of growth would involve
doubling of production between 2016 and The predominant energy consuming sub-
sectors in industry are: ; Non-metallic minerals with 26% of final energy
consumption; ; Chemicals (including petrochemical) with 26% of final energy
consumption, even if non- efficient use of natural gas is included; and ; Cast
Iron and steel with 25% of final energy consumption Additionally, it is assumed
that energy consumption in Food, beverages and tobacco does not fully reflect
energy consumption in the energy balance Number of large industries and number
of SMEs There are 170019industrial enterprises, 421 “large, 1851 “medium” and
162452 “small” industrial organisations registered in Georgia according to
Geostat Data There are also 5295 enterprises, the size of which, according to
Geostat, is unknown at this stage Comparisons of the energy intensity (energy
consumption per tonne of output) for other industrial processes with the EU are
difficult as there is not disaggregated/detailed available information on exact
products and processes for production in Georgia and their energy consumption
For this reason, the measure “-: Industry data disaggregation” ” is necessary to
improve the information available and allow for meaningful comparisons Special
features in energy consumption Based on reviews of energy audits and reports
composed after sites visits conducted during the preparation of the NEEAP, it
turned out that industry energy savings will come from  main routes: 22  Co Ltd
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () No/low cost energy-saving,
good energy management and control, which is an enabling step to identifying and
eliminating poor behaviour/ bad practice These include: ; Understanding site
energy consumption patterns, through suitable sub-metering and software;
Identifying and eliminating poor-practices, “good-housekeeping”, behavioral
changes; Careful development of theplanning and scheduling for optimum
efficiency; Identifying and financially assessing low-cost technical
opportunities ; ; ; Low-cost technical opportunities which naturally follow good
energy management andsome of the more importantmeasures are the following: : ;
Thermal insulation on steam/ hot-water/ refrigerant gas pipes; ; Attention to
steam leaks, steam traps, maximum condensate returns, etc; ; Compressed air leak
detection, water traps, etc ; Upgrades to building fabric: glazing, roof and
wall insulation; ; Lighting: replacing HID (High Intensity Discharge),
incandescent or old style T8 tubes with EE LED lighting Sector specific
technical investment opportunities: Traditionally, this is what emerging economy
nations focus upon There are several excellent sector-specific opportunities
within Georgia Details of two of these sectors – steel and cement – are provided
in the list of measures of NEEAP Cross-sector investment opportunities, that are
common to several industrial sectors: Four of the more important are also
provided in the list of measures: ; Boilers and Steam/ hot water systems:
combination of no/low cost EE actions combined with replacing old (inefficient,
over-sized) boilers with new, correctly sized EE boilers ; Refrigeration
compressors and distribution systems – similar comments related to replacing old
(inefficient, oversized) refrigeration units with new, correctly sized ones ;
Motors: replacing old (inefficient and over-sized) motors with new, correctly
sized IE3 or better motors, where applicable with Variable Speed Drive (VSD)
controls ; Lighting: concerted effort to upgrade, particularly incandescent
lights with LED equivalents Key barriers and drivers /stimulations of
investments There are several key barriers to investment in the industry sector
These include: Technology & Equipment: Historically, there has been little or no
investment in energy- saving equipment; In some industries, this is  step
backwards in decades Mentality and awareness: The mind-set of industry is still
production driven,  historic mind-set and not entirely due to the poor state of
the economy There is limited awareness of modern energy management techniques
and EE technologies relevant to the site 23  Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan (NEEAP) () Energy Management: There is limited understanding of
where energy is consumed across each site This is true for electricity
consumption and secondary energy consumption such as steam, hot water, or
compressed air For example, the consumption at the boiler may be known but where
this heat is used is not known ESupport and skills/ expertize: Unlike EU Member
States, there is very little amount of independent energy-efficiency expertize
that Georgian industry can draw-on, including generic / cross-sector
technologies and sector-specific technologies Limited funds or opportunity to
borrow: The Georgian industrial sector has had significant market-based
problems, particularly in the past  years Many long-standing export markets:
Russia, Ukraine and other Regional countries – have been directly or indirectly
affected by conflicts or embargos, which has reduced export demand hence
production Issues, such as EE, are  long way down the priority list Even when
good EE investment opportunities are identified by site managers or by external
consultants, there is limited opportunity to borrow for investment Low energy
costs: Although unit costs have been rising substantially in recent years and
are now approx 50 – 70 EUR/MWh (electricity) and 20 to 25 EUR/MWh (natural gas),
they are still only around 50% (electricity) to 70% (natural gas) of the unit
costs for EU industry High cost for investment in EE technologies: There is no
local production of EE equipment in Georgia: boilers, furnaces, motors, etc As
such, Georgian industry has to pay international prices for any EE equipment
plus transport and any import levies Lack of incentives, covering several areas:
There are currently no incentive-based mechanisms to encourage energy efficiency
or renewable energy in industry  Industry measures: Energy savings and financing
The following measures can be carried out in the industry sector They are
directly linked with the following horizontal measures: ; -: “Alternative policy
measures – Incentivising / mandating energy efficiency in industry” – which will
stimulate interest and improve the financial case for investment even beyond the
strong financial parameters present; ; -: “Alternative policy measures –
Training and education, including energy advisory programmes” – which will
educate industry’ decision-makers on investment options; ; -: Qualification,
accreditation, and certification schemes in industry”, will increase the level
of certified expertise in the industry sector to better enable investment
planning and implementation; ; -: „Energy audits and management systems, boiler
inspections in the industry sector“ – which will require energy audits/energy
management in large industries and encourage them in SMEs The implementation of
these measures would involve the following key aspects: 24  Co Ltd National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () ; ;  programme of technical assistance;
; Energy audits from the horizontal measures (-) would also be linked to
investments Improvement of the statistical data on industry production and
energy consumption in this sector – which has technical assistance requirements;
; nvestment toindustry – via  credit line, bank financing, or other financing
sources in 2019 – Table 6Overview of estimated prices of individual measures 25
Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Required financing in
the coming period Title of the energy saving measure Implementing body Source
Type of financing # Overall 2019 2020  Central government Non-financial € 6000 €
€ 6000 Industry data disaggregation GEOSTAT - Total: €  000 €  € 6000 Industry /
private companies Industry of cement and fossil fuel recycle Investment €
39616000 €  € 39616000 Conversion of wet- cement process to dry cement process -
Total: € 39616000 €  € 39616000 € 39622000 €  € 39 622 000 Summary 26  Co Ltd
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) ()  Energy efficiency measures in
transport  Characteristics of transport in Georgia Transport is an important
sector for energy consumption in Georgia – and it is noteworthy, that energy
consumption in this sector continues to grow In 2014, transport accounted for
33% of final energy consumption in Georgia – up from 26% in The vast majority of
fuel used in the transport sector is either oil products (diesel and gasoline)
or natural gas – all of which are imported Diesel, gasoline, and natural gas use
make up % of energy consumption in the transport this sector - 14,175 GWh This
amount represents over 30% of all energy consumed in Georgia in For this reason,
energy efficiency in the sector is becoming more and more important The dominant
types of transport in Georgia include: • In passenger transport, there is
strong public transportation system utilizing mini-buses – along with large
buses However, increasingly, private light-duty passenger vehicles are taking up
large amount of passenger •  freight transport, there is  significant amount of
freight being transported by rail However, it should be noted that the amount
offreight, carried by motor vehicles is not assessed There is no official data
on the fuel efficiency of the passenger vehicle fleet, though it can be assumed
that it is less efficient than that of the EU – given the age of most vehicles
in Georgia where 91% of vehicles are older than 10 years It is noteworthy that
in Georgia, Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) is an increasingly popular fuel and it’
consumption is growing– with fueling stations throughout the country and  large
number of vehicles utilising this fuel However, there are no reliable statistics
as to the level of penetration of these types of vehicles Also It should be
mentioned that there is  significant increase of vehicles using Liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG), with / the increase of the hybrid vehicles Key barriers and
drivers / stimulations of investment include: • Lack of knowledge / awareness
about the vehicle fleet and lack of regulation fulfillment to ensure vehicles
are less polluting; • Lack of walking / cycling friendly infrastructure in most
major urban areas – in particular the capital; •  lack of comfortable / reliable
public transport; •  culture increasingly geared towards personal cars resulting
significant traffic and pollution problems in the capital and elsewhere  Main
policy measures addressing energy efficiency in transport The package of
measures outlined below would involve the following key aspects: 7saqstati
(2015) saqarTvelos 2014 wlis statistikis wlis wigni saqarTvelos statistikisaTvis
Geostat (2015) 2014 year Georgian statistical annual book for statistics of
Georgia   Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () • Vehicle
improvement measures – fuel replacement by the natural gas (potentially by the
electrical energy) and better management of the vehicle fleet, including the
introduction of technical inspections, that has started in 2018 and will be
implemented in the future (-); ; Public awareness campaigns on Eco-driving and
to encourage efficient transport modes would increase the efficiency of driving
habits (-); Investments in intra-city urban mobility would result in modal
shifts from passenger cars to public transport, walking, and cycling
Additionally, improvements in the road infrastructure would improve efficiency
of movement of traffic (-, -, -, -, and -) ; Technical assistance would be
necessary for implementation of these measures, likely to be divided into
programmes to achieve goals:  Assistance to municipalities for urban
infrastructure and transport planning program– including feasibility studies for
major infrastructure projects such as , bike lanes, etc Infrastructure planning,
that will be implemented in Tbilisi, is running step by step  Assistance to the
national government in implementing the program for mandatory periodic technical
inspection , as well as in planning major national infrastructure projects and
evaluating – amongst other aspects - how they may impact energy consumption
Expences / budget of that type of measures can be available at the planning
stage of the program  Promotion of efficient heating and cooling As part of
compliance with the EED in order to encourage efficient production of heat and
cooling, it is necessary to analyse the costs and benefits of implementing
cogeneration for any large installation (over 20 MW of thermal input – for
industry and electricity) The process of identification of competent public
authorities, private actors for implementation, and development of methodology
for installation-level cost-benefit analysis has not yet been developed in
Georgia This measure will be revisited in future NEEAPs  Energy transformation,
transmission, distribution, and demand response  Characteristics of the energy
transformation, transmission, and distribution sector in Georgia Total installed
capacity in the system Georgia’ total installed capacity is ,225 MW (including
recent MW coal power plant) the most significant addition being the MW thermal
power plant (TPP) operating with new technologies (combined cycle natural gas-
fired power plant) commissioned in Of this total capacity, almost 78% is from
hydro power with the remainder being from thermal plants based mostly on natural
gas Total energy transformation sorted by the source of energy The only
significant energy transformation within Georgia is the transformation of gas
(with some coal) for electricity In 2014, 59 TWh of gas were supplied to thermal
power plants producing electricity amounted to 04 TWh – of which 103 TWh were
for own use In 2015 the conversion efficiency is   Co Ltd National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () expected to have been higher due to
commissioning of  231 MW combined cycle gas turbine power plant with expected
54% efficiency Grid transmission losses High voltage transmission grid total
losses in 2014 were around % which is  high standard The transmission losses are
expected to grow with the commissioning of additional capacities However,
according to the 10 year development plan of the network, investment in certain
projects has  local effect of reducing the losses for particular regimes of the
network10 Total losses via transmission and distribution The losses per year via
transmission and distribution of the electricity system have been decreasing and
the level of losses can be considered average when compared with losses in EU
countries such as Bulgaria (%) and Romania (12%) but high in comparison to EU
countries such as Germany (%) and France (%) It is noteworthy that in 2015, JSC
Telasi and JSC ENERGO-PRO Georgia had losses of below 10% Planned development of
the sector The 10-year network development plan has within it an aggressive
projection of energy production and export with significant increase of
generation capacity There are three scenarios of demand growth: %, % and %
annual growth There are more than 120 hydropower projects in development under
memorandums signed with potential investors11 Along with hydropower, the 10 Year
Plan Network Development Plan also envisages construction of two 230 MW TPPs
operating with new technologies (expected to be combined cycle natural gas-fired
power plants) by 2019 and 2026 respectively and one coal fired 150 MW power
plant in Additionally, the completion of  MW wind power plant in 2016 is
introducing wind technology for the first time in Georgia and generate 88 GWh
per year12 The total generation capacity is expected to grow from the current
level to: ; ,820 MW by 2020; ; ,663 MW by 2025; and ; ,365 MW by At the time of
NEEAP development, this efficiency could not be calculated in retrospect for
2015 as the energy balances had not been completed for Transmission System
Operator JSC “Georgian State Electrosystem” (2015) Ten Year National Development
Plan for , table , page In EU Member States, the average losses in transmission
networks are between % and % (Ecofys 2013 “Incentives to improve energy
efficiency in EU Grids”) 10 Transmission System Operator JSC “Georgian State
Electrosystem” (2015) Ten Year National Development Plan for  Figure 11 Based on
information from the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development 12 As of 15
November 2016, the WPP Plant is in its testing regime Opening ceremony was held
on October , The plant is owned by JSC Georgian Energy Development Fund   Co Ltd
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Furthermore, new regulations
have been developed to allow for the integration of distributed energy producers
into the grid – such as micro producers Though this was not modelled as  part of
the NEEAP, it can be considered an energy saving measure Along with the major
expected developments in power sector, there is an ongoing development in oil
and gas Expansion of South Caucasus Pipeline (SCPx) is expected to add about
billion m3 of natural gas to Georgia’ energy balance by 2019-There is also an
ongoing development of  gas storage facility which will be completed for when
the new capacity of the SCPx will start operation Related to distribution, the
completion of individual electricity metering and expansion of the gas network
are the major expected developments In Tbilisi the individual metering has been
completed while in the regions about 40,000 consumers still need to be metered
individually Special features in energy consumption, production, distribution
and demand response Among the special features in energy consumption and
production is that there is  strong seasonal dependence on hydropower as the
main source of electricity in Georgia As  result there is  mismatch between
hydropower production and demand patterns where peak of consumption is in
winter, while peak of hydropower generation is in summer Additionally, the
summer peak and winter peak are both trending upwards as summer demand is
increasing Thus, it becomes difficult to develop hydropower without seasonal
trade or exchange with neighbouring countries Therefore the development of power
sector in Georgia is strongly related to its neighbouring countries For example,
strong stimulating role in developing the HPP projects has been played
construction of transmission capacity to Turkey Another special feature in
Georgia is the significant portion of non-regulated electricity consumption (by
Abkhazia Which accounts about 18% of country’ total consumptionIt is also worth
noting that in energy consumption there is still  strong contribution of fuel
wood which is consumed very inefficiently in simple stoves in poorly insulated
homes Furthermore, for this wood, mainly newly cut trees are burned13 Comparison
with EU, comment on the tendencies/trends (level of losses); In comparison with
the EU, Georgia has  much higher share of renewable energy for electricity
production In the EU countries - % of electricity was produced from renewable
energy in 14 In 2014, Georgia had % of electricity produced was from renewable
hydropower15 Related to electricity losses, Georgia’ level of system losses are
higher than those of some EU countries but lower than others – and can generally
be considered average, though with room for improvement 13 See Public Policy
Research & Training Centre (2014) Policy to encourage sustainable energy
consumption by Georgian households”)  14 EuroStat (2015) Renewable energy
statistics: Available at  explained/indexphp/Renewable_energy_statistics 15
Geostat (2015) Energy Balance of Georgia, Available at    Co Ltd National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Key barriers and drivers of investments In the
power sector, as is generally the case with power infrastructure projects,
investors are reluctant to invest at their own risk into major projects unless
there are strong possibilities for off-taker agreements For this reason, some
major drivers of investments are as follows: ; The Turkish market where
electricity can be exported ; Where there are strong power purchase guarantees
provided by ESCO and backed by the Government ; Companies which are producing
power for their own consumption – of which there are  number in Georgia ; USAID’
G4G aiming to establish the trading mechanism that will allow Georgian producers
to trade on the Turkish market At the same time, the regulations dealing with
electricity and gas distribution are highly encouraging of energy efficiency One
additional driver of investment in the gas sector is that the government is
investing in extending the gas network to the regions (to the settlement level)
SOCAR is continuing this investment to bring the connection to the customers’
property16  Planned policies and investments in the primary energy sector
Planned investments for the primary energy sector are described in the measures
below The implementation of these measures would involve the following key
aspects: ; Large-scale investments in improvements of:  More efficient natural
gas fired power plants –   230 MW (-);   Efficient household energy production
from solar hot water heaters and biomass stoves – Improvements in the
transmission network (-) including  grant mechanism (- and -) ; Energy Policies
which are to already in place (- and -) and which are planned (-) Which aims to
promote investmentს in the sector (- and -) ; Potential improvements of the
dispatch system to reduce costs and primary energy consumption17 ;  programme of
technical assistance for the period 2017 – 2020 – This would likely be via:  One
package oriented towards improvements in the hydro-power and dispatch systems
One package oriented towards distribution systems  One package linked to the
residential sector measures which would be focused on solar hot water heaters &
efficient biomass stoves 16 The connection cost for low pressure customers (-
m3/) is 400 GEL (lump sum payment) See GNERC (2009 July ) Decision #12:  “New
Customers” of natural gas (those connected to the grid after 2008) are
deregulated, which means that GNERC does not set  tariff cap for those customers
See Ministry of Energy’ Decree # 69 of 25 September 2007 on “Natural Gas Supply
Deregulation and Partial Deregulation”: ( and the following amendment in 2008
(Energy Minister’ Decree # 73 of 24 July  17 Reducing system costs could be the
primary purpose of the measure – and reducing hourly or daily balancing system
costs would probably also reduce primary energy consumption   Co Ltd National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Table : Overview of individual measures
in the energy supply sector Required financing in the coming period Title of the
energy saving measure Type of financing Implementing body Source No Total 2019
2020  €  Government Non-financial €  €  Natural gas savings - € 50 000 000 €  €
50 000 000 Oil and Gas replacement of old thermal JSC Georgian Oil and Gas
Invest Corporation power plants with new Corporation - technologies € 50 000
0000 € 50 000 000 Total Government Non-financial € 32 000 € 6000 € 38 000
Hydropower generation companies with technical assistance and funding from
Rehabilitation and Industry international financial investments of hydropower -
Private Invest €  €  732 000 €  732 000 institutions and with the plants
companies support of the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development and
GNERC Total € 32 000 €  738000 €  770 000 Government Non-financial € 32 000 € 32
000 € 64 000 GNERC, Ministry of Optimization of power reserves and seasonal
modes - Economy and Sustainable Development Total € 32 000 € 32 000 € 64 000
Private Expanding the power grid, Invest € 58 000 00 € 172 918 000 € 178 718 000
companies integrating new generation - Georgia State Electrosystem capacities
into the grid and reducing losses Total €  800 000 €  72 918 000 € 178 718 000
Invest Industry / Private companies €  945 000 € 10 143 000 € 20 088 000
Regulatory Requirements for Rules for Calculating Energo-Pro Georgia Ltd, -
Normative Electricity JSC Telasi, Losses - Investment € 20 088 000 Incentives
Total €  945 000 € 10 143 000 - € 13 000 € 13 000 € 26 000 Goverment Non-
financial   Co Ltd National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) () Invest
Industry / Private companies Rules for calculating natural €  410 000 €  410 000
€  820 000 gas normative losses in Distribution licensees pipelines - investment
incentives Total €  423 000 €  423 000 €  846 000 € 25 000 € 26 000 € 51 000
Government Non-financial Donors / Grants Grants Non-governmental €  € 300 000 €
300 000 Introduction of energy organization WECF - in - efficient stoves
cooperation with relevant agencies €  € 649000 € 649000 Customers Invest Total €
25 000 € 975 000 €  000 000 € 12000 € 12000 € 24000 Government Non-financial
Donors / Grants Grants Non-governmental €  € 246 000 € 246 000 organization WECF
- in Solar water heaters - cooperation with relevant agencies €  € 369 000 € 369
000 Families Invest Total € 12 000 € 627 000 € 639 000 Total € 70 269 000 €
190856000 € 261 125 000   Co Ltd