Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission Resolution #20
September 18, 2008 Electricity (Capacity) Supply and Consumption Rules Article
General Provisions  Electricity (Capacity) Supply and Consumption Rules
(hereinafter the Rules) regulates the relationships, between the Distribution
licensee, low-capacity power plant, on the one hand, and consumer, on the other,
in the process of electricity purchase, sale, distribution, pass through and/or
consumption  The terms introduced by these Rules are obligatory for all persons,
who carry out electricity generation, distribution, pass through and/or
consumption Imposing obligations inconsistent with these Rules is prohibited
The terms in these Rules have the same meaning as in the law of Georgia on
“Electricity and Natural Gas”  Besides the cases introduced in these Rules,
termination of electricity supply for consumers without preliminary permission
of the Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission
(hereinafter the Commission) is prohibited  Any person, if his/her rights are
violated, has the right to appeal to the Public defender of consumers interests
existing within the Commission, or to appeal to the court In addition, he/she
has right to demand compensation from the violator for the damage which occurred
due to the violation of guaranteed rights under these Rules and/or failure to
meet its obligations Article  Main Principles  Electricity Distribution licensee
is obliged to provide consumer with safe, uninterruptable and reliable
electricity supply within relevant parameters, in accordance with the
obligations under the legislation, license terms, these Rules and corresponding
agreement  Distribution licensee is obliged to:  provide service to all types of
the consumer in accordance with these Rules;  follow established technical and
safety standards and rules;  provide constant service for the consumers – among
them, permanent 24 hour telephone hot-line service;  carry out immediate
response to the notification about termination of electricity supply or/and to
the voltage deviation from the established norms;   sell electricity to the
retail consumer (according to the terms established in these Rules);  pass
through electricity belonged to another person via distribution network upon
request till the electricity network of preliminary identified person;  ensure
the proper implementation of obligations under the terms of the license and
these Rules  Distribution licensee is obliged to react immediately and stop the
electricity supply, if:  life, health or property of an individual is under the
threat;  technical standards and safety rules are violated In addition, based on
the complexity of the violation, the consumer will be given  reasonable period
to remedy the violation;  Dispatch Licensee has granted the appropriate
instruction to restrict or terminate the electricity supply  Distribution
Licensee is authorized to stop electricity supply, according to the current
legislation and these Rules, if:  the consumer has not paid the electricity
bills;  the consumer violates the requirements of the technical conditions for
the connection to the distribution network;  the consumer does not fulfill those
conditions laid down in the Rules and / or contractual obligations which are
envisaged for termination of electricity supply under current legislation;
there is  need for planned and emergency maintenance works  Distribution
licensee is obliged to conduct monetary payment with consumer only after full
reflection of the payment amount and last date of payment in the bill defined in
these Rules Article  Service sector and the general conditions  Under Power
Purchase Agreement the seller makes commitment to supply electricity according
to the current legislation, these Rules and contractual obligations; and the
buyer makes commitment to pay the cost for the received electricity and to
follow the terms defined in current legislation, in these Rules and in the
agreement  These Rules and corresponding agreement are the main legal documents
for electricity consumer, which regulates rights and responsibilities for the
Distribution licensee, the low-capacity power plant and consumer while
electricity purchasing, selling, distributing, passing through and/or consuming
The terms described in this methodology are the integral parts of the Power
Purchase and Service Agreement  Power Purchase Agreement, as well as, Service
Agreement between Distribution Licensee and consumer can be executed in written
form (as well as, with bill or other written document, according with the forms
approved by these Rules)   The terms of Power Purchase Agreement, in case of
execution this kind of agreement with consumer, shall be in accordance with
requirements of these Rules and current legislation  Distribution licensee has
no right to make an agreement and/or other deal with the consumer, content
or/and terms of which contradict with these Rules and current legislation
Distribution licensee and low-capacity power plant must give  justified written
answer to the consumers’ application no later than ten day after receiving the
application Declarant should be replied in the same written or electronic form
as the application was received (if declarant has not requested to answer in
another form)  Distribution licensee is obliged to develop application templates
on various inquiries and make them accessible to consumers in compliance with
these Rules (According to the repeatedly received applications from the
consumers)  Electricity retail consumers are divided into two groups for the
purposes of these Rules,  household consumer -natural person which buys and
consumes electricity only for household purposes;  non-household consumer– all
other retail consumers, but household consumers Article  The basis and
prerequisite for service  Distribution licensee is obliged to register as
subscriber that person, who uses (or will use) their service in accordance with
these Rules  Consumer of electricity is obliged to use electricity only for the
purposes indicated in application   person who wants to receive and consume
electricity must submit an application to  corresponding distribution licensee
for the purpose of registering as subscriber  In case of changing the owner of
residential apartment, an utility or other object,  new owner is obliged to
present, alongside with property-related documentation, application envisaged by
this article to the corresponding distribution licensee  If  person temporary
uses the real property and owner of the property gives him written permission,
the person has  right to be registered as subscriber, and the Distribution
licensee is obliged to register him as subscriber on the given address
Furthermore, Distribution licensee is authorized to request contribution of
money on its deposit in accordance with the conditions of these Rules and
covering the full accrued debt (Licensee can request full recovery of the debt
if registration of the temporary owner causes the cancellation of the
registration of the subscriber with accrued debts, and in case if the non-
payment of the indebtedness or disagreement on  the conditions for debt covering
the Distribution Licensee has right to decline registration of  subscriber on
the given address)  Applicant expresses his will to receive and consume
electricity under existing legislation and conditions given in these Rules by
submitting application for registering as  subscriber and, on the other part,
Distribution license expresses consent and undertakes obligation to supply
applicant with electricity under current legislation and conditions given in
these Rules by registering applicant as  subscriber Both the Distribution
licensee and the applicant (subscriber) has right to demand from another party
the written confirmation of the deal, at any stage of legal relations  Under the
given Article, applicant for registration as  subscriber cannot be required to
pay any type of fee for implementation of procedures and activities needed for
electricity supply, unless other condition is envisaged directly in these Rules
Application should indicate: ) name and address of the applicant; ) name of the
Distribution licensee; ) consent of natural person responsible for payment, his
name and surname, address, identification number by the identity card (other
identification document admitted by Georgian legislation is acceptable) or in
case of legal person – his name, or in case of other person – his name, legal
address, bank details, identification code of taxation body and date; ) place
(address) where electricity supply and service should be provided; ) type of
ownership of real property, where the service should be provided; ) purpose of
electricity consumption (household or non-household); ) If consumer wishes: )
execution of the Power Purchase Agreement; ) presence on the drawing up of an
act for the starting of electricity supply of new subscriber; ) Other similar
requirements, considered necessary by the applicant  The following documents
should be attached to the Application additionally: ) Real estate ownership
certificate In case of temporary ownership of the real property - written
consent of the real property’ owner; ) Written consent of natural person
responsible for payment, if applicant and responsible for payment are different
persons After receiving application for registering as subscriber the
Distribution licensee is obliged to register consumer as  subscriber within no
more than five working days and ensure his electricity supply in accordance with
the conditions described in these Rules Right after of the implementation of
necessary procedures and activities for registering of applicant as  subscriber
and before starting up electricity supply, the Act for the starting electricity
supply of new subscriber should be drawn up; it should  include type and number
of electricity meter, initial reading, and number of stamps and period of
planned inspection of electricity meter The consumer has  right to request the
presence at the drawing up the act In this case licensee is obliged to notify
the date of the drawing up the act After registration as  subscriber the
Distribution Licensee is obliged to ensure execution of the Power Purchase
Agreement with consumer (if the consumer wishes so) While execution of the
agreement the Distribution Licensee and/or consumer have right to use approved
standard template of the “Power Purchase Agreement” (see Annex #) In addition,
while the selection of the agreement template the consumer has right to request
the signature of the standard template of the “Power Purchase Agreement” After
the registration, the execution of the Power Purchase Agreement(if the consumer
wishes so) and the drawing up the Act for the starting of electricity supply of
new subscriber the Distribution Licensee is obliged immediately to provide
electricity supply, if Application for the registration as  subscriber does not
envisage another date Article  Rendering of service  Customer is not required to
accept any condition or/and service, which is not defined directly under these
Rules and existing legislation  Distribution licensee is authorized to inspect
non-household consumers’ electric installations and their compliance with
technical and safety norms  Distribution licensee is not obliged to inform
consumer in advance about the date of possible inspection Customer is obliged to
give permission to the representative of Distribution Licensee to the electric
installations in his ownership Moreover, the consumer should be able to identify
inspector by corresponding documentation, uniform and other means known to the
consumer beforehand  Only distribution licensee carries out the restoration of
electricity supply to the consumer, after proper inspection of electricity meter
and connection to network  Upon consumer’ request it is possible to provide him
with backup power supply (abovementioned requires execution of the relevant
Agreement) Distribution Licensee is able to require one-time compensation of
costs from the consumer for the backup power supply in accordance with the
preliminary executed agreement (This requirement is also applicable to provide
the consumers’ closets, garages, elevators, lightening and other destination
facilities or/and utilities with electricity that due to request of the consumer
(or consumers) should be carried out separately)  Distribution licensee should
grant to the concerned party (as well as, retail consumer) with opportunity to
use temporarily those electrical installations (electricity receivers), which
are used for household, construction and other purposes  Abovementioned requires
preliminary agreement with Distribution licensee In case under this Paragraph
relations are carried out as follows:  Temporary connection to the distribution
network and, if necessary, organization of metering point are not obligations of
Distribution licensee Abovementioned should be carried out by the concerned
party after preliminary agreement with the Distribution licensee;  Parties can
agree upon the connection of electrical installation (electricity receivers) to
network, its utilization and accrual method, without individual metering
Provided that charge of consumed electricity by mutually agreed method (without
individual metering), is  one-time operation and shall not exceed  calendar
months;  When it is impossible to determine full amount of consumed electricity
with the use of electrical installation() and agreement between them does not
envisage any other condition, calculation must be carried out on the basis of
multiplication of utility’ installed capacity, its utilization rate  and  hour
operation during  day Calculation by this method is  one-time operation and
shall not exceed  calendar months  In the case envisaged in Paragraph  of this
Article, Distribution licensee is obliged to state  justified refusal to supply
the consumer with electricity, if it is evident that use of electrical
installations (electricity receivers) will effect unfavorably on power- supply
system or/and distribution licensee capability to render service on  standard
level to him or/and other consumers Article  Organization of metering point  The
Distribution licensee is obliged to record consumed electricity individually
(except for the case directly envisaged in these Rules), for this purpose
organize the metering point, accordingly, purchase, install and repair the meter
necessary for installing the metering point, if required, different equipment,
electrical installation and other facilities that provide proper functioning of
the metering system and protect against illegal (unauthorized) interference If
installed capacity of electrical installation of non-household consumers
connected to one point of distribution network is less than  kW, the parties are
authorized to agree on electricity consumption without meters The amount of
consumed electricity in such case is determined according to installed capacity
of electrical installation and operating hours  If required, the distribution
licensee has the right, and according to the requirement envisaged in the Rules
is obliged to remove, repair, check and change the metering point (including
electricity meter) and also his own other devices, including electrical
installations   The Distribution licensee is authorized to charge the consumer
with metering point organization cost (including the costs of purchasing and
installing meters or other devices) only in cases directly defined in the
current legislation and these Rules  Electricity meter, accordingly, other
electrical installations of metering point shall be protected against illegal
(unauthorized) interference not to change or encroach electricity meter readings
Metering point shall comply with the current technical regulations and standards
in Georgia Metering point shall be organized so that the interested party will
be able to take meter reading, and also distribution licensee freely carries out
other activities under these Rules  Before the Distribution licensee starts work
to provide consumers with electricity, the consumer is obliged to inform him
about the obstacles or/and other negative circumstance in the workplace known to
him  Electricity meter shall be installed (accordingly, metering point shall be
organized) near the territory that belongs to the consumer (outside the
territory), but not more than50meters away from the apartment, enterprise or
other object where the electricity is consumed, if any other provision is not
considered under technical regulation or the agreement between distribution
licensee and the consumer  If it is necessary, electricity meter shall be
installed on the territory belonging to the consumer, in such case the consumer
shall provide the place for installing metering point wiring so that the
representative of Distribution licensee will be able to install metering point
and wiring, test, repair and take meter reading on regular basis  The
Distribution licensee is responsible for organizing metering point (including
installing electricity meter), putting stamp in  proper technical way drawing up
relevant act, where the name and surname of the representative of Distribution
licensee, consumer, person responsible for keeping metering point and the meter
will be indicated In addition: ) Distribution licensee provides restoration,
change and installation of the damaged metering point, its component meters,
other electrical installations and facilities on his own costs ) In case the
metering point installed in the entrance of the residential building is damaged,
the Distribution licensee is authorized to request the reimbursement of damage
from the consumer in case if the damage of metering point is proved to be the
consumer’ fault; ) The consumer is responsible for keeping metering point and
also its component meters, electrical installations when the metering point is
installed on the protected area that belongs to the consumer (This subparagraph
does not apply to the cases of damaging the metering point installed in the
entrance of the residential building) In case of two-way flow of electricity
between consumer and Distribution licensee networks, reversible electricity
meter shall be installed (accordingly metering point shall be organized so that
electricity overflow is metered in both directions)  If the consumer is supplied
with electricity from the distribution licensee via the transformer belonging to
the consumer, electricity meter shall be installed (metering point shall be
organized) on the side of high voltage If ,220 kV voltage household consumer
owns ,380 kV voltage electrical installation that was connected to the
distribution network and the consumer’ total capacity to be connected is not
more than10 kW, the consumer is authorized to request organization of ,380 kV
voltage metering point instead of 220 kV voltage metering point according to one
of these rules: ) The consumer shall apply to the Distribution licensee and
provide organization of ,380 kV metering point on its own In this case, the
Distribution licensee is obliged to issue technical condition free of charge
within two weeks of receipt of application; ) If the distribution licensee
organizes the ,380 kV metering point, the distribution licensee is obliged to
provide the change of metering point, and the consumer – to reimburse the cost
incurred on change and organization of metering point that shall not exceed 250
GEL including VAT Article  Electricity Distribution Licensee Obligations and
Expansion of Electricity Distribution Network  Electricity frequency, voltage
and other parameter in the distribution network shall comply with norms and
state standards in the electricity sector While providing electricity supply
Distribution licensee is responsible for those electricity parameters that can
be corrected or changed by him  According to these Rules the Distribution
licensee is obliged to own electricity distribution network and its component
electricity installations, including metering devices (meters) and other
electricity installations and is obliged to supply consumers with electricity
Expansion, reconstruction, repair of distribution network of distribution
licensee, installation and connection of electrical installations,
decommissioning or switching shall be carried out only by the distribution
licensee  In case the consumer paid to the Distribution licensee for purchasing
the meter, as well as for rehabilitation, reconstruction, arrangement of
electricity distribution network, or/and expansion of distribution network, the
consumer is authorized to request pay back or offset the paid amount (This
paragraph does not apply if consumer has paid according to the requirements
directly defined in these Rules and current legislation) Article  Illegal
consumption of electricity and preventing methods  Illegal consumption of
electricity means unauthorized connection to distribution network, deliberate
damage of electricity meter stamps (if the accuracy of metering is violated),
falsification of digital data of electricity meter, electricity theft; in
addition  it includes electricity consumption with avoidance of electricity
meter and/or without the meter (except for the cases envisaged by these Rules
and legislation)  In case of illegal consumption of electricity, Distribution
licensee under these Rules is obliged to terminate electricity supply to
relevant consumer In this case, termination of electricity supply is possible
without preliminary notification of consumer (except for the cases, when it is
known that termination of electricity supply to this consumer increased expenses
will cause deterioration of person’ disproportionately with the respect to the
amount to be charged or already charged)  As soon as illegal consumption of
electricity is revealed, Distribution licensee is life or health, or obliged to
draw up corresponding act  in case of unauthorized connection of electrical
installations to the network, deliberate damage of electricity meter stamps (if
the accuracy of metering is violated), falsification of digital data of
electricity meter, electricity theft, including electricity consumption with
avoidance of electricity meter or/and unauthorized consumption of electricity
without the meter the consumer of electricity is obliged to pay  cost of
consumed electricity during its illegal consumption The amount of illegally
consumed electricity will be defined on the basis of corresponding act, under
the following rule: ) When it is possible to define total amount of illegally
consumed electricity, Distribution licensee will accordingly correct the data )
When it is possible to define the amount of illegal consumed electricity or
errors of meter reading within  calendar day, but initial date of illegal
consumption of electricity is unknown, representative of Distribution licensee
calculates the total amount of consumed electricity from the date of last
inspection (but not longer than  months) of electricity meter (metering point) )
When it is impossible to define the amount of illegally consumed electricity
within  calendar day, but an initial date of illegal consumption of electricity
is known, the amount of consumed electricity within violation period is
calculated through multiplying the capacity of consumption from the network by
the consumer at the moment of inspection by  hour consumption within  calendar
day Moreover, when it is impossible to measure capacity of consumption or
measured capacity is considerably low than installed capacity of electrical
installations of the given consumer, the amount of consumed electricity within
violation period is calculated according to the potential capacity of consumer’
receivers and time table of capacity usage in accordance with Annex  to these
Rules (according to the this paragraph charging period shall not exceed  months)
) When it is impossible to define an initial date of illegally consumption of
electricity and the amount of illegally consumed electricity within  calendar
day, the amount of consumed electricity is calculated within one month period
through multiplying of consumed power from the network at the moment of
inspection by  hour consumption within  calendar day Moreover, when it is
impossible to measure  capacity of consumption or measured capacity is
considerably low than installed capacity of electrical installations of the
given consumer, the amount of consumed electricity within violation period is
calculated according to the potential capacity of consumer’ receivers and time
table of capacity usage in accordance with Annex  to these Rules ) if consumer
does not permit the representative of Distribution licensee to define installed
capacity with ungrounded (unjustified) reasons and prevents him to undertake his
work, Distribution licensee has right, after  working days from written notice
to the consumer, to charge the multiplication (nominal capacity) of voltage,
current and capacity factors on incoming wiring during the allowed maximum load
through calculating 15 day usage  If after using charging method envisaged by
subparagraph “” of Paragraph  of this Article, the consumer submits in writing
justified argumentation to the Distribution licensee about the non-admission of
the representative of Distribution licensee within  reasonable time-frame (no
more than  months after receiving of the Billing Act, then illegal consumed
electricity shall be calculated according to the installed installations within
calendar day under capacity of consumer’ electrical subparagraph “” of Paragraph
of this Article  While calculating the total sum of installed capacity of
consumer’ electrical installations given in this Article only those electrical
devices in his ownership are used which are connected or ready to be connected
to the network and are in operating condition  The consumer who illegally used
service of Distribution licensee, in addition to imposed with compensation of
damage, under existing Administrative penalty, envisaged by Georgian code of
Administrative Offenses  In case illegal consumption was attested, Distribution
licensee has  right to charge legislation may be customer with cost of insured
letter send to him under these Rules  The Distribution licensee is authorized
not to deliver service to the person who used this service illegally and as
result is charged with debt until the debt is fully covered or redistribution of
the debt is agreed Article  Calculation and Payment of the Electricity Cost  The
cost of consumed electricity by the consumer is calculated on the basis of the
individual electricity meter reading  Billing and payment of consumed
electricity shall be carried out on monthly basis (in accordance with consumed
electricity by the retail consumer)  The cost of consumed electricity by  retail
customer shall be paid within time-frame indicated in the bill which must be not
less than 15 days If the last day of time-frame 10 coincides with  day off or
holiday and payment offices do not work, the next working day would be
considered as  day of time-frame expiration  The bill must include the last day
of the payment, consumption tariff, the amount of the consumed electricity (kWh)
and its cost, the place where payment is available without additional charges,
as well as the phone number of the hotline service of the Distribution licensee;
On the other side of the bill must be indicated information determined by the
decision of the Commission  After expiration of time-frame of payment indicated
in the bill if the cost is not paid the Distribution licensee is authorized to
terminate electricity supply to the consumer In addition, Distribution licensee
is obliged to consider  period of the payment of the debt and its reflection
(not more than 3working days) In case of violation of these procedures
termination of the electricity supply will be postponed The bill shall be
delivered to retail consumer every month at one and the same time as far as
possible Non-receipt of  bill does not exempt the consumer from payment of
consumed electricity  (Repealed192012, №)  The redistribution of the accrued
debt may occur upon the agreement of the parties which should be signed with the
corresponding agreement  Due to non-payment of the indebtedness the termination
of the electricity supply is not allowed during evening hours, in  day off or
holidays and the day before them  The consumer must pay the charged cost by cash
in the corresponding service center or by transfer payment on the bank account
Charged cost for the consumer must be fully indicated in the bill The consumer
has right, in agreement with Distribution licensee, to prepay cost of
electricity Prepaid amount will be taken into account during next payment In
case of deficit, it must be reimbursed to Distribution licensee It is prohibited
for the Distribution licensee to shift indebtedness from one consumer to
another, without written consent of the latter Article 10 Mechanisms of Accrual
and Payment Ensuring  Distribution licensee is authorized to demand from the
consumer to deposit an amount of money and in case of failure to pay on time the
consumer shall ensure to deposit required amount under the Rules and Procedures
for the withdrawal of the indebtedness accrued on the consumer; In addition, the
Distribution licensee shall reflect the amount to be deposited in the consumer’
accrued debt if: )  person has registered as  subscriber on the address of
property in temporary use; ) Consumer delayed to pay the cost of consumed
electricity three and more times within  12-month period; ) Service to the
consumer was terminated due to illegal consumption of electricity 11  Deposit
shall not exceed average monthly payment of consumed electricity by  consumer
(with consideration of seasonality) and in case of registration of subscriber on
the address of property in temporary use – more than amount of consumed
electricity in the first calculating period The consumer must not be required to
deposit an amount for the second time if deposit amount was not intended by
distribution license-holder to cover indebtedness between them or was not
returned back, in accordance to the requirements of these Rules  Deposit amount
must be returned to the consumer if: ) The consumer voluntarily denied the
service and fully covered the indebtedness during final payment; ) During
12-month period the consumer fairly executed his duties and charged payments are
fully and timely covered (except for the deposit on the basis of registration of
subscriber on address of property in temporary use);  If electricity meter was
installed in the consumer’ protected area (in residential apartment, as well)
and by reason of consumer it is impossible to read the meter, the Distribution
licensee is authorized to charge consumer with one month payment, which is
calculated based on quantity of average monthly consumption of electricity by
the consumer (with consideration of seasonality) The difference between real and
accrued consumption must be corrected (re-calculated) in accordance with the
real reading of consumer’ electricity meter  The Distribution licensee is
responsible for the results caused by not exercising the rights under these
Rules If the Distribution licensee has not exercised the rights under these
Rules and as  result the consumer has not covered his debt for the period of two
months or more and agreement about the conditions of the debt payment does not
exist, upon consumer’ request the abovementioned indebtedness shall be equally
reallocated for two years at least if parties do not agree on other time-frame
If the dispute between the Distribution licensee and the consumer is reviewed in
the Commission in such case the time-frame for debt redistribution is determined
by the Commission Article 11 Inspection of Electricity Meter and Dispute Related
to Metering  In order to resolve disputes fast between parties, at the request
of one party  meeting between them shall be held without delay Representative of
the Distribution licensee is obliged to draw-up an act signed by the parties for
the purpose of dispute resolution, agreement upon any issue or record of other
fact  If consumer’ electricity meter incorrectly counts electricity consumption
or electricity meter reading was incorrectly recorded and as  result the bill
was incorrectly issued the Distribution licensee is obliged to correct consumer’
data  In case of dispute due to incorrect reading of electricity meter,
distribution licensee shall inspect electricity meter reading and draw up an
act, at least in  working days 12 For the purposes of these Rules the inspection
of electricity meter implies visual observation of the measuring facilities
(meters), determination of actual deviations with different methods if
necessary, its confirmation, expert (official) measuring or/and other activities
necessary for evaluation of abovementioned measuring facilities  The consumer
shall not be imposed with charge for electricity meter inspection, if period of
scheduled inspection or time-frame of inspection of electricity meter is overdue
Organization of metering point of electricity consumption of  retail consumer,
as well as, removal, confirmation or/and installation of electricity meter is
provided by the Distribution licensee Covering of the costs for delivered
service may be imposed on retail consumer only in case directly envisaged under
these Rules  Confirmation of electricity meter is carried out under established
rule of Georgian law on “Providing Unified Measurement”  Upon the request of the
consumer Distribution licensee can undertake unplanned inspection of accuracy of
electricity meter The Distribution licensee is obliged upon request to inform
other parties about intended inspection The costs for the unplanned inspection
of electricity meter upon consumer’ request are paid by the consumer; except the
cases envisaged in Paragraph  and Paragraph  of this Article, as well as in
cases when other condition is not determined by these Rules or/and existing
legislation In case of removal of the electricity meter, Distribution licensee
is obliged to draw up an act immediately  The electricity meter can be inspected
by the Georgian national agency on standards, technical regulations and
metrology and/or any other accredited laboratory in Georgia upon request of an
interested party In case the inaccuracy of electricity meter does not correspond
with permissible deviation given in passport the cost for proper organization of
metering point, including confirmation of electricity meter and installation
costs are played by the Distribution licensee (except the cases of illegal
consumption of electricity envisaged by these Rules) An interested party
(including the consumer) is able to request on the basis of the written
application the expert (official) measurement on the any stage of determination
the accuracy of the accounting In this case before any necessary activity for
execution of the request the Distribution Licensee is obliged to give written
explanation to the consumer about the procedures required to conduct the expert
(official) measurement and all possible expenses related to them, in the cases
directly envisaged by Paragraph  of this Article  Distribution licensee is
obliged to provide presence of the consumer or his/her representative on
inspection of electricity meter by notifying the place and exact time of the
meter inspection Distribution licensee shall inform the consumer about
inspection, at least, prior  working days 13 Disputes related to the recording
of consumed electricity by  retail consumer will be solved under the following
rule: ) If proved that inaccuracy of electricity meter (detrimental for the
consumer) exceeded to its permissible error given in passport, Distribution
licensee is obliged to correct meter reading correspondingly to the determined
error, from  date of beginning of inaccurate recording of electricity meter up
to inspection date The overpaid amount shall be returned to the consumer as soon
as error is corrected or/and offset shall be done while next payment (depending
on consumer’ will) ) If proved that inaccuracy of electricity meter (beneficial
for the consumer) exceeded to its permissible error given in passport,
Distribution licensee is obliged to correct meter reading correspondingly to the
determined error, from  date of beginning of inaccurate recording of electricity
meter up to inspection date The cost of over-supplied electricity by the
Distribution licensee shall be paid by consumer If determination of the initial
date of inaccurate accounting of electricity meter is impossible, re-calculation
shall be carried out according to the period between the penultimate meter
reading and requested inspection This period of time must not exceed  months
Determination of the electricity meter inaccuracy and accruing according to
inaccuracy rate shall be carried out only in Georgian national agency on
standards, technical regulations and metrology or/and any other accredited
laboratory in Georgia on the basis of this meter inspection In case of damage of
electricity meter the consumer is obliged to notify immediately Distribution
licensee (in writing or orally, via phone call, as well) Upon receiving
notification Distribution licensee is obliged to confirm about it in writing and
immediately undertake needed activities and procedures for permanent electricity
supply of this consumer (under these Rules and conditions envisaged by
legislation); In the case envisaged by this Article the conditions for an
illegal consumption of electricity cannot be applied If for  certain period of
time recording of consumed electricity (with electricity meter) was not done
or/and for this period of time determination of consumed electricity is
impossible (in case of damage of electricity meter), the consumer for unrecorded
consumption of electricity will be charged with payment, equal to an average
monthly consumption of electricity during  months consumption, after arrangement
of accounting (with consideration of seasonality) This is  one-time charge
method and shall not exceed three months In case the meter is removed for
replacement purposes the Distribution licensee is obliged to install  new meter
immediately (notwithstanding, whether, due to different occasions, an old meter
(removed) needs laboratory or/and any other inspection), or act in accordance to
Paragraph 15 of the given Article In case of removing or/and revealing damage
(defect) of electricity meter, when recording of consumed electricity is not
done with electricity meter and before 14 arranging of proper accounting,
customer, only with his written consent the consumer will be charged with
payment calculated from his average electricity consumption (with consideration
of seasonality) It is  one-time charge and shall not exceed one calendar month
If replacement of individual electricity meter takes place within  calendar
days, written consent of the consumer under this Paragraph is not necessary If
conditions of the given Article do not envisage other rule, these conditions and
charge method do not apply to the cases of illegal consumption of electricity
Article12 Dispute Resolution  It is not permitted to terminate electricity
supply without bringing  claim and determining reasonable time for fulfilling it
(in compliance with the conditions and procedures under these Rules) If
electricity supply is terminated in contempt of procedures envisaged by these
Rules, supply shall be restored immediately  During hearing of  dispute between
consumer and Distribution licensee by the Commission or  court it is not
permitted to terminate electricity supply to  consumer without requirement of
Commission or court decision, except cases when metering point is in order and
dispute concerns to disagreements on current payment  Paragraph  of the given
Article does not apply to  consumer, who was terminated with electricity supply
under conditions of these Rules before initiating of dispute In such case,
electricity supply will be restored under mutual agreement between the
Distribution licensee and consumer or/and Commission order or court decision,
upon customer’ intermediation  It is not permitted to terminate electricity
supply on the basis of Distribution licensee demand to cover indebtedness, if
limitation period is expired from the arisen of demand under Civil Code of
Georgia (except for the case, when consumer acknowledged the debt, under Article
137 of Civil Code of Georgia) Correspondingly, it is not permitted to use
electricity termination and other ensuring mechanisms for the purpose of
acknowledging the abovementioned indebtedness In such case, Distribution
licensee is authorized through Commission or court, to claim from the consumer
to cover the indebtedness and, provided the Commission’ assent or court decision
– to terminate electricity supply before completion of dispute  Circumstances
given in this Article do not exempt the consumer from the current payments for
consumed electricity Article 13 Data Collection on electricity supply and
service  Distribution licensee is obliged to keep unified register of
electricity supply and service, on the basis of terms under these Rules and
corresponding instructions adopted by the Commission 15  Unified register of
electricity supply and service reflects information, determined under these
Rules and corresponding instructions, as well as, information about response to
customers via written, verbal, electronic or phone call applications and
executed service  In the Unified register of electricity supply information is
entered by Distribution licensee through appropriate notes in corresponding
register (journal) Distribution licensee is obliged to keep relevant register
(journal) in operational control centers, stations and substations owned by him,
as well as, in the service-centers Distribution licensee is obliged to keep
registers (journal) in electronic form, (in addition the instruction adopted by
the Commission can envisage obligation to keep different type of information
or/and register (journal) in electronic form)  Registers (journals) (except in
electronic form) shall be properly bound and attested by the Distribution
licensee  Distribution licensee is obliged to give identification number to the
entry in register (journal), whereby it will be possible to determine serial
number of the relevant register (journal) and entry in the journal and to
identify the facts  In the register (journal) where the data about supply
consumers with electricity or service is reflected the following information is
entered: ) termination of electricity supply or/and deviation from allowable
standard of voltage (with indication of particular distribution network or
section); ) Initial date of termination of electricity supply or/and deviation
from allowable standard of voltage; ) date of restoration of normal supplying
with electricity (with indication of particular distribution network or
section); ) termination of electricity supply without notification (non-planned)
and planned termination; ) technical information of electricity supply, in case
of deviation (unsteadiness) from allowable standard of voltage, particularly,
deviation of established range of voltage in control points; ) cause and
circumstance that provoke termination of electricity supply or deviation
(unsteadiness) from allowable standard of voltage  The base for entry in
relative register (journal) about termination of electricity supply or/and
deviation (unsteadiness) from allowable standard of voltage is indicators of
corresponding automatic instrument, as well as, response of electric facilities
or/and verbal notification from different persons (among them, notification by
phone call)  While defining period of time of termination of electricity supply
or/and deviation (unsteadiness) from allowable standard of voltage, time keeping
begins from notifying the indicators of corresponding automatic instrument, as
well as, response of electric facilities or/and verbally from different persons
(among them, notification by phone call) 16  The basis for information entering
in register (journal) is written, phone or verbal notification from the consumer
Distribution licensee is obliged to give identification number to consumer’
notification that makes it possible to define sequence of entry in register
(journal) Identification number of  statement shall be notified to an applicant
as soon as notification is received Distribution licensee shall divide consumer’
statements by categories in correspondence with issues in it In register
(journal), where consumer’ (or group of consumers) statements are registered
shall be indicated (entered) the following information: ) Name and address of
the applicant; ) Registration number of statement; ) Short description of the
statement (in accordance with given category); ) Date of response; ) Type of
response; ) If responded by letter, date and number of the letter; ) Result –
whether statement (application) was solved Facts, entered in registers
(journals), within two weeks after the end of every calendar month, must be
reflected in unified register of electricity supply and service It must be
possible to determine respective register (journal) and sequence of the entry
Distribution licensee is obliged to keep all those registers (journals) during
years, on the basis of which entered information is represented in unified
register of electricity supply and service Information represented in unified
register of electricity supply and service is public Article 14 Termination of
electricity supply and service  If carrying out of scheduled repair and
reconstruction works will terminate electricity supply to the consumers, they
shall be informed about the termination of electricity supply and its duration
preliminary, for at least  days (This information is possible to be delivered to
the consumer via different information sources) In case of violation of the
given condition, termination of electricity supply shall be postponed
correspondingly  If the consumer during one month twice in succession
deliberately does not permit the representative of Distribution licensee to an
electricity meter, the Distribution licensee is authorized to terminate
electricity supply to the consumer Only an obvious interference in the
activities of the representative of the Distribution licensee by the consumer is
considered as the non–admission of the representative of Distribution licensee
to an electricity meter by the consumer  The consumer is entitled to decline the
services of Distribution Licensee and it shall be informed to the relevant
Distribution Licensee, prior, at least, 10 days In such 17 case, the consumer is
obliged to make final payment (This paragraph does not apply to the cases
envisaged by Article 28 of these Rules)  Termination of service does not exempt
the consumer from the obligation to cover the costs of consumed electricity  In
case the consumer moves to another address or/and the Distribution licensee
terminates the service, the Distribution licensee is authorized to require
or/and charge unpaid amount of money arisen from the final payment to the person
responsible for payment (to an assigned responsible person for payment under
Article  of these Rules) or transfer accrued debt to this consumer’ new address
(In case the consumer moves to  different address in the area of this
Distribution licensee)  If termination of electricity supply causes
deterioration of  person’ life or health or incomparably big costs in respect of
accrued debts and this becomes  known fact to the representative of the
Distribution Licensee, he is obliged to consider this circumstance and determine
the additional time-frame for the payment of accrued debt and termination of
electricity supply (reasonable time-frame) that shall not be less than one month
In case of determination of the additional time frame the corresponding protocol
shall be drawn up and handed over to the consumer under the terms defined in
these Rules  The rule defined under paragraph  of this Article also applies to
the case of illegal consumption of the electricity For the next period upon
revealing such fact until the metering is reorganized the accrual of consumed
electricity shall not be carried out as it is envisaged in case of illegal
consumption of the electricity Article 15 Electricity Supply by Distribution
Licensee to the Retail Consumer via Electricity Network owned by other person
The person, who is not the Distribution licensee but owns electricity network is
obliged to endure using his own network and pass through electricity for the
purpose of supplying other consumers with electricity under Civil Code of
Georgia  For enduring electricity pass through and network usage the
compensation is issued according to the defined rule under Civil Code of Georgia
The agreement between the Distribution licensee and the owner of the network
shall not cause deterioration of electricity supply for  retail consumer
including rising the price of electricity  In case of utilizing the network
owned by other person, the Distribution Licensee is not authorized to pay for
electricity to the network owner more than it is set by the Commission for the
service of electricity pass through in the section of distribution network of
the same voltage and similar technical data  Upon supplying electricity via
branched network from  network belonged to  consumer (or consumers) to other
consumers, metering point shall be organized on each consumer’ branch and
individual meters shall be installed In addition to 18 individual meters,
metering point shall be organized and controlling electricity meter shall be
installed up to the given branch (under the rule envisaged by these Rules)  In
case of assignation of  part of real property from one person to another for
temporary use, registration of  temporary user (direct possessor) as  subscriber
(upon request), is carried out under the conditions envisaged by these Rules,
only after proper organization of individual metering point which will help the
Distribution Licensee to determine individual consumption of electricity by this
consumer (subscriber) In case envisaged by this paragraph, organization of
electricity wiring and metering point of temporary user is not the obligation of
the Distribution Licensee though the latter is obliged, in compliance with
requirements of these Rules, to draw up an act about the inspection of
electricity meter (metering point)  In case the consumer (subscriber)
temporarily uses the part of  real property and if he receives electricity via
owner’ electricity network that is then branched to different consumers
(subscribers) of electricity network, consumed electricity by this consumer is
purchased according to the controlling meter installed before branching The
abovementioned meter is  settlement meter and covers the costs of consumed
electricity with the same tariffs as it is received/recorded in the electricity
meter of the relevant voltage level from the distribution network In this case
the Distribution Licensee is obliged to: ) deliver service for each consumer
under current legislation and conditions envisaged by these Rules; ) carry out
the settlement individually with the consumer, issue  bill individually and
charge him/her with the cost according to consumed electricity; ) to reallocate
the difference between the controlling (settlement) meter and the sum of
individual meters of each subscriber caused by technical loss in proportion with
consumed electricity by the consumers; ) to examine the issue and express his
position in case of dispute between consumers about accrual; ) Correct data on
the basis of consumer’ controlling and individual meter readings if necessary
under current legislation and conditions envisaged by these Rules; ) In case of
non-payment of debts timely, to supply the electricity provided to terminate the
electricity supply to that consumer who is charged with debt The Distribution
licensee may apply this subparagraph only in case if it is not possible to
terminate electricity supply to the abovementioned consumer by the Distribution
licensee  If two or more consumers are located in one building whose individual
metering is technically impossible or inappropriate, only in case of prior
approval of the Commission, the Distribution licensee is authorized to record
consumed electricity and carry out settlement via the meter recording total
costs on the basis of written agreement with the abovementioned consumer In such
case the Distribution licensee is obliged to: 19 ) Submit timely the written
agreement with the consumer to the Commission; ) Register each consumer as
subscriber and deliver service on the basis of the written agreement with them
and under these Rules; Article 16 Open (Public) Information  Distribution
licensee is obliged to make the following information accessible in the service
centers: ) Types of available and planned services, discounts and benefits (if
so); ) Distribution, pass through and consumption tariffs and related changes; )
Consumer data history and responses to their applications (this shall be
accessible only to  given consumer); ) Report of last year (years) activities,
as well as, work plan and investment program for the next year; ) Written
records of termination of electricity supply and deviation (unsteadiness) from
allowable standard of voltage, and other writings in register (journal)
envisaged under these Rules; ) About low capacity power plants, with indication
of estimated cost of electricity and contact details (on the basis of given
information by the low capacity power plants); ) Other public information
envisaged by the legislation  Under this paragraph, electricity Distribution
licensee is obliged to declare (dispose) information in available place (on the
official page, as well) and at the same time information about other persons
must be protected from disclosure; Submitted information must be updated in
shortest time-frame (not later than  working days) – with indication of time and
date of last updating  Distribution licensee is obliged to put those rules on
the visible place in service centers, as well as all formal notes or documents,
concerning issues of service and payments Article 17 Rule for drawing up an Act
Representatives of Distribution licensee are obliged to draw up  corresponding
Act for the purpose of registering electricity meter installation, meter
removal, violation by the 20 consumer of terms and obligations envisaged by
these Rules or/and by agreement, termination and restoration of electricity
supply or other fact (occasion) Moreover, drawing up an Act is not obligatory in
case termination, for the reason of indebtedness and restoration of electricity
supply  Electricity distribution licensee gives registration number to the Act
and records it in the relevant register (journal)  An act shall include: )
Circumstance that is the purpose to draw up an act; ) Date and place of drawing
up an Act; Position, name and last name of draftsman; data on consumer; Other
necessary information for case decision; ) An Act is signed by draftsman and
consumer (if these Rules or/and current legislation envisage condition of
presence of consumer); Moreover, an Act can be signed by witnesses if there are
any; ) Different proofs, indication of violation and other facts can enclosed to
an Act; ) If  person refuses to sign an Act  relevant record shall be done The
person, who refused to sign, has  right to enclose explanations and remarks, as
well as, to give reasons for refusal on signing  Upon revealing of violation of
conditions and obligations envisaged by these Rules or/and agreement, an Act
additionally should include: ) Violation fact, date and place; ) Name and
address of witnesses or/and affected individuals, if any; ) Explanatory note (if
requested); ) Installed capacity of consumer' own electricity installations (if
necessary); ) Information about grounding (if needed); ) Whether violation was
corrected on spot  Additional notes are written in an Act about electricity
meter (metering point) inspection: ) Type and number of electricity meter,
reading at the inspection moment and constant of electricity meter; ) Numbers
and condition of stamps; ) Data of current and voltage transformers; ) Number of
disk rotations of electricity meter (number of impulses for electronic
electricity meter) and corresponding time 21 ) Name of used electricity meter
and serial number, validity of attesting, accuracy rating; ) In case of three-
phase meter, additionally must be indicated results of measurement of primary
and secondary current and voltage  In case of installation or removal of
electricity meter, in an Act additionally must be recorded: ) Technical
characteristics, number and reading of electricity meter (meters); ) Number of
stamp; ) Explanation of removal or/and installation of electricity meter; ) Name
of laboratory where inspection will be held (in case of removal of electricity
meter)  If due to other circumstances, removal of consumer' electricity meter is
needed, it must be placed in  separate package and sealed If needed, electricity
meter shall be sent for inspection in  corresponding laboratory, upon request of
consumer Distribution licensee implements sending electricity meter with an Act
to  laboratory  In case the consumer does not attend  drawing up of an Act on
illegal consumption of electricity or denies signing it, an Act shall be sent to
the consumer via insured letter  Upon accounting of received and consumed
electricity via two or more electricity meters, an Act must be drawn up in
accordance with electricity meter on corresponding feed source of electricity
supply Representatives of administration body or institution may attend the
drawing up an Act and it must be confirmed by their signatures An Act shall be
drawn up in two copies One copy is given to consumer and the second to the
Distribution licensee In case of removal of electricity meter, an Act shall be
drawn up in three copies The third copy with electricity meter will be sent in
the laboratory It is prohibited to execute any activities under Act, if it is
drawn up with violation of conditions or/and procedures envisaged by these Rules
From the date of drawing up an Act, the Distribution licensee is obliged to keep
formal note and removed electricity meter, for the reason of technical failure,
at least during one 22 year (except for the cases, when the electricity meter
after repairing was installed to the same consumer) Article 18 Relations between
low capacity power plant and  retail consumer  Retail consumer is entitled to
purchase electricity from the Distribution licensee, as well as, from the low
capacity power plant, on the basis of Power Purchase Agreement drawn up under
corresponding rule  Low capacity power plant is obliged to pass  copy of Power
Purchase Agreement with  retail consumer to  respective Distribution licensee
and provide electricity supply to  retail consumer in  time-frame envisaged in
the agreement  In  feasible short term, Distribution licensee is obliged to set
an initial date of electricity supply from low capacity power plant to retail
consumer and provide implementation of Power Purchase Agreement, in accordance
with conditions of these Rules  Low-capacity power plant is entitled to deny
signing of Power Purchase Agreement, if it is obviously impossible to carry out
service for the consumer due to technical or other reasonable condition
Purchasing electricity by  retail consumer from  low-capacity power plant does
not exempt the Distribution licensee from any other obligation or liability
envisaged by these Rules; the Distribution licensee is obliged to execute
services for  retail consumer of distribution network and electricity meter
(metering point), electricity pass through, electricity supply, termination or
renovation of supply, as well as, charge and cover of price of consumed
electricity and service, with the same conditions and procedures, as in the case
of electricity distribution for  retail consumer  Responsibility for payment of
cost of electricity charged to  retail consumer under these Rules lies on  low-
capacity power plant, and responsibilities for accounting of consumed
electricity, writing  bill and its delivery to  retail consumer are within
bounds of Distribution licensee –  possessor of  respective distribution network
This condition does not apply when agreement between Distribution licensee and
low-capacity power plant envisage other conditions  Payment of consumed
electricity cost by  retail customer, envisaged by Power Purchase Agreement,
implies fulfillment of all those obligations from  retail consumer that was
carried out for supplying this consumer with electricity, under current
legislation, these Rules and the Agreement; It is not permitted to charge retail
consumer with any other one-time payment for electricity purchasing and supply,
except electricity consumption 23 price, set by Power Purchase Agreement and
Article 19 of these Rules All other individual payments (for electricity meter,
correction, illegal consumption and other one- time payments) shall be reflected
in consumer’ bill separately under these Rules  Upon payment of consumed
electricity price by  retail consumer,  low-capacity power plant is obliged to
fulfill all obligations for providing the retail consumer with electricity under
current legislation and these Rules  Upon purchasing electricity from  low-
capacity power plant by  retail customer,  bill instead of consumer’ tariff
indicates consumption price of electricity (under agreement) and payment,
charged for the consumer, with shared and total indicators for  low- capacity
power plant and Distribution licensee In case of purchasing of electricity from
low-capacity power plant under these Rules, the retail consumer shall pay in
bank account indicated in the bill For supplying  retail consumer with
electricity,  low-capacity power plant is obliged to have  corresponding
agreements on services of dispatching, transmission or/and pass through of
electricity, in accordance with these Rules and current legislation Article 19
Power Purchase Agreement between  low-capacity power plant and  retail consumer
Under the Power Purchase Agreement between  low-capacity power plant and retail
consumer electricity consumption price includes cost of power generation and all
those services (transmission, distribution, pass through, provide the system
reserve and other) that are needed for permanent and stable supply of retail
consumer with electricity, under current legislation and conditions of these
Rules  In case of purchasing of electricity by  retail customer from  low-
capacity power plant, it is prohibited to terminate electricity supply to
retail customer, whether supplied amount and capacity from  low-capacity power
plant to  retail customer, are proper or not Moreover, payments by  low-capacity
power plant of price of executed services and expenses for supplying retail
consumer with electricity are relative to actual expenses for supplying retail
consumers with electricity 24 Article 20 Execution of Power Purchase Agreement
between  low-capacity power plant and retail consumer  For the purpose of
execution of Power Purchase Agreement between  low-capacity power plant and
retail consumer, agreement must be passed to the Distribution licensee, who
passes through the electricity, fills actual consumption or/and provides system
reserve  Along with Power Purchase Agreement between  low-capacity power plant
and retail consumer,  low-capacity power plant shall provide the corresponding
Distribution licensee with the following documentation: ) Name of retail
consumer and address, where electricity should be supplied; ) Requested capacity
for the consumer; in case of non-household consumer, time schedule of annual,
monthly, daily and one-hour forecasting supply and consumption of electricity )
Agreements about dispatch and, if needed, about transmission; ) Conditions of
providing retail consumer with system reserve capacity  The Distribution
licensee, except for the case envisaged by Paragraph  of the given Article, in
accordance with concrete Power Purchase Agreement, is obliged to deny pass
through of electricity and relevant service, if: ) Under the Power Purchase
Agreement the time-frame for beginning of electricity purchasing is obviously
inconsistent with these Rules; ) Conditions of providing retail consumer with
system reserve capacity are not specified; ) Date of supply and expected
capacities of electricity is not defined by  low-capacity power plant; )
Corresponding agreements on electricity dispatch and, if needed, service of
transmission, are not registered by  low-capacity power plant  After receiving
Power Purchase Agreement between retail customer and  low-capacity power plant,
the Distribution licensee is obliged to determine an exact date of beginning of
electricity supply from  low-capacity power plant to  corresponding retail
consumer in  time-frame of  days Date of beginning of electricity supply shall
not exceed 40 calendar days from receiving of the agreement (if the electricity
purchasing agreement between  low-capacity power plant and retail consumer does
not envisage more late date of beginning 25 of electricity supply) The
Distribution licensee is obliged to notify parties about exact date of beginning
of electricity supply, as soon as defined  On the base of Power Purchase
Agreement,  date of beginning of electricity supply from  low-capacity power
plant to  respective retail consumer must be  date of beginning of  calendar
month  If retail consumer is supplied with electricity directly from  low-
capacity power plant, low-capacity power plant is obliged to record, along with
the electricity, generated by him and delivered to bus-bar, data on electricity
consumption by  retail consumer and present them as required  If  low-capacity
power plant supplies  retail consumer with electricity without participation of
Transmission and Distribution licensees or it is technically impossible to
supply consumer via Transmission or Distribution licensees, Power Purchase
Agreement, between  low-capacity power plant and retail customer, does not
require to be handed over to Distribution licensee and to be provided the system
reserve by Distribution licensee Distribution licensee cannot be charged with
any liabilities in connection with electricity supply of retail consumer,
envisaged by this Paragraph Article 21 Relations between  low-capacity power
plant and Distribution licensee  In case of purchasing of electricity by  retail
consumer from  low-capacity power plant, in accordance with consumptions of
retail consumer, the Distribution licensee reserves (creates) system reserve
under conditions of current legislation; Low-capacity power plant is obliged to
cover expenses for providing of system reserve for the retail consumer
Distribution licensee (with consideration of interests of  low-capacity power
plant) is obliged to draw an agreement with  bank and under this agreement  sum
paid by  retail consumer (to an account indicated in check) will be transferred
to the accounts of  low- capacity power plant and distribution licensee,
simultaneously in accordance with their shares  low-capacity power plant and the
Distribution licensee can agree on other method of mutual settlement  If the
retail consumer does not cover cost of purchased electricity or/and service in
indicated date in the bill, the Distribution licensee, in connection with the
retail 26 customer, is liable to act in accordance with conditions of these
Rules for similar cases of electricity distribution (provides the termination of
electricity supply for this customer, as well) Moreover, after 10 days from
consumer’ failing to cover the debt on due time indicated in the bill, the
Distribution licensee notifies  low-capacity power plant and determines
reasonable time-frame for covering indebtedness If indebtedness is not covered
after expiration of the time-frame, the Distribution licensee is liable to
request bank guarantee from  low-capacity power plant for securing future
payments for electricity or/and pass through service  If  low-capacity power
plant does not cover the cost of electricity pass- through or/and indebtedness
of  corresponding retail consumer or cannot submit financial guarantee required
by the Distribution licensee, upon notification of parties the Distribution
licensee is entitled to keep out the low-capacity power plant from distribution
network, unless mentioned conditions are not met In this case, the Distribution
licensee is obliged to offer distribution service to  corresponding consumer of
low-capacity power plant, under conditions of these Rules Article 22 Agreement
on electricity pass through for  retail consumer via distribution network  Upon
request, the Distribution licensee is obliged to draw up an agreement with  low
capacity power plant about pass through of electricity for  retail consumer,
which is valid until other decision by parties is not received  For the purpose
of drawing up an agreement about pass-through,  low capacity power plant shall
apply to the Distribution licensee with corresponding application  Application
about electricity pass through must include: ) Details of applicant (low
capacity power plant); ) Name, address and bank details of legal person or
individual entrepreneur (as well as, other form of legal entity), responsible
for payment of cost of electricity pass through; ) In accordance with current
legislation and these Rules, consent of  low-capacity power plant on payment of
costs arisen from electricity pass through and service of supplying of retail
consumer with electricity ) Location and title of the Distribution licensee’
electricity delivery points; ) Schedule of annual, monthly, daily and hourly
forecasting supply of electricity to delivery points, with indication of
conditions, sources and corresponding capacities to balance actual supply and
consumption of electricity 27  Data given in Subparagraph “” of Paragraph  of
the given Article depends on the Power Purchase Agreement signed by respective
low-capacity power plant and retail consumer, and electricity consumption
capacities of retail consumer (consumers) Change of mentioned data does not
require changing in electricity pass-through application or in pass-through
agreement  Not later than  working days from receiving of application on
electricity passing- through, the Distribution licensee is obliged to draw up
the agreement on electricity passing-through with low-capacity power plant
After submitting  filled application to the Distribution licensee in accordance
with this Article, conditions requested under the application will be included
in electricity pass- through agreement  Despite of disagreement on electricity
pass-through individual or/and unforeseen conditions envisaged by these Rules,
the Distribution licensee is obliged, after expiration of  working days from
submitting of application and on the base of conditions in the application,
presented in compliance with Paragraph  of this Article, to carry out pass-
through of electricity and in compliance with conditions and procedures of these
Rules and ensure fulfillment of electricity pass-through agreement between  low-
capacity power plant and  retail consumer  Electricity pass-through agreement
must envisage terms to balance an actual supply and consumption of electricity,
among them, terms to prevent results arisen from non- delivery of appropriate
capacity of electricity by  low-capacity power plant and other negative
circumstances, as well as, conditions of activities under circumstances, which
possibly result in forced limitation of consumers in electricity distributing
system  Distribution licensee has no right to refuse electricity pass-through
via his private grid, except cases, when denial is justified by non-payment of
pass-through fees In accordance with  tariff for the service, adopted by the
Commission, the Distribution licensee receives compensation for electricity
passing-through, respectively to actual amount of passed-through electricity via
his private grid 28 Article 23 Reimbursement of the fee for consumed electricity
and service to low capacity power plant by  retail consumer  Under current
legislation and these Rules,  low capacity power plant is obliged to fulfill all
obligations to ensure  stable supply of electricity for  retail consumer  Under
these Rules and the agreement, in case of non-delivery of electricity, envisaged
by Power Purchase Agreement,  low-capacity power plant is obliged to compensate
incurred costs to the Distribution licensee for supplying retail customer with
electricity  If the pass-through electricity agreement does not envisage other
terms, settlement between  low-capacity power plant and the Distribution
licensee will be as follows: ) When at the end of the reporting period it turns
out that electricity owned by the Distribution licensee was consumed, the
Distribution licensee has  right to require to compensate the damage from  low-
capacity power plant (if any), as well as, electricity, consumed by  retail
consumer, by  consumer tariff ) When at the end of the reporting period it turns
out that electricity consumed (received) by  retail consumer is less that
electricity received by the Distribution licensee for supplying retail consumer,
the Distribution licensee is obliged to pay to  low-capacity power plant  cost
of electricity that was not supplied to the retail consumer under Power Purchase
Agreement with the price arisen from the difference between electricity
consumption price and pass through service price  In case electricity pass
through tariff does not envisage normative losses in electricity distribution
grid, the Distribution licensee fills (compensates) extra-normative losses In
case electricity pass-through tariff includes compensation of electricity
normative losses, the Distribution licensee is obliged to refill actual loss of
received electricity in delivery point and in distribution pass through network
Article 24 Purchasing electricity on the bus bar of small capacity power plant
by  retail consumer  In case of purchasing electricity on the bus bar of low-
capacity power plant by  retail consumer for ensuring the purposes under these
Rules, while passing through and supplying electricity the same requirements and
obligations that are envisaged in case of electricity supply to retail consumers
by low capacity power plant apply to the abovementioned retail consumers 29  In
case of purchasing electricity on the bus bar of low-capacity power plant, the
retail consumer is obliged to provide execution of an agreement or  contract for
supplying electricity under the legislation Article 25 Electricity supply by the
retail consumer in the distribution network  The retail consumer is authorized
to connect his own low-capacity power plant (the design capacity of which does
not exceed 100 kW) to the Distribution licensee free of charge and carry out
supply of electricity produced by him under current legislation and defined
terms under these Rules The Distribution licensee is obliged to support the
connection to the distribution network of any power plant and communicate with
electricity producers under the legislation and defined terms under these Rules
The retail consumer who owns  low-capacity power plant the design capacity of
which does not exceed 100 kW is authorized to request the offset of electricity
cost produced and supplied in the Distribution licensee’ network by him (after
charging the retail consumer by the Distribution licensee under relevant rule)
from the electricity cost received (consumed) from the distribution network,
or/and refund the paid amount during the next settlement  The distribution
licensee is obliged to consider the amount of electricity produced and supplied
by the retail consumer in the distribution licensee network while settlement
with the retail consumer, in the settlement bill, together with the cost of
consumed electricity by the retail consumer in the corresponding settlement
period, the information about obligation fulfillment shall be indicated  In case
of electricity production and supply in the distribution network by the retail
consumer, the relationship is carried out under these Rules and the agreement
between the Distribution licensee and the retail consumer  If no other condition
is agreed between the Distribution licensee and the retail consumer, the
obligations while settlement shall be fulfilled as follows: The offset of the
cost of the electricity supplied in the distribution network shall be carried
out from the electricity cost received (consumed) from the Distribution licensee
network; electricity cost supplied in the distribution network by the retail
consumer equals the difference between the price of electricity received
(consumed) from the distribution network by him and electricity distribution
tariffs  The Distribution licensee is not required to provide the connection of
low-capacity power plant to the distribution network, purchase technical
equipment necessary for the connection and carry out construction and
maintenance works (including purchasing and installing reversible counter) In
addition, he is obliged to develop and issue Technical Condition for connection
of  low-capacity power plant to the distribution network the design capacity of
which does not exceed 100 kW While 30 developing the above mentioned Technical
Condition, the Distribution licensee is obliged to define the connection point
and other requirements necessary for this connection so that its performance
shall be connected to possible small costs (considering factual circumstances)
Article 26 Connection of  new consumer to the distribution network  While
connecting  new consumer (electrical network of  new consumer) to the
distribution network, the connection fee is paid only in the cases directly
envisaged under these Rules Payment for connecting is  one-time payment
Moreover, parties can agree on advance cover and phased payment of the
connection fee  The person wishing to connect (applicant) is obliged to address
corresponding Distribution licensee on connection request to the distribution
network (in electronic or written form)  Rules and requirements for the
connection of new consumers to the distribution network (Articles 26 and 261)
apply only to the connection of the residential apartment, enterprises, or other
facilities to the distribution network that are not connected to the
distribution network and they were not supplied with electricity according to
the conditions under the legislation Also, when real estate is separated
(separation of  subscriber) and there is  registration request from  separated
property owner as  subscriber (non-household consumer)  Requirements for the
connection of new consumers to the distribution network (Articles 26 and 261of
these Rules) do not apply to supply residential apartments, enterprises or other
facilities with electricity with already issued Technical Condition and is (or
was) supplied with electricity under current legislation (Except the case
envisaged by 2nd sentence of Paragraph  of this Article)  The change of legal
form of the consumer, or his/her real estate, or the owner on the part of the
property (except for the request of the owner of the separated property to
register as  subscriber –non-household consumer) is not the basis for the
consumers (or new consumers) to pay the connection fee to the distribution
network or change it In addition, temporary connection to the distribution
network for supplying seasonal (not more than  month during the calendar year)
facilities with electricity of  kV voltage and not more than 30kW capacity and
also for supplying construction works and electrical installations 31 and
facilities used for this purpose and the case of providing the existing consumer
(subscriber) with alternative (back-up) power is not the reason for paying the
connection fee   If real estate is separated (separation of  subscriber) and
there is  registration request from the separated property owner as  subscriber
– non-household consumer- the Distribution licensee is authorized to charge  new
consumer only with incurred costs on organizing the metering point but not more
than 100 GEL including VAT (including the costs of purchasing and organizing
new meter and other equipment)  The fee for connecting  new consumer to  kV (380
) ssand /10 kV voltage distribution network is determined according to the
connection capacity with offered packages (Annex #)  Distribution licensee is
obliged upon receiving application about connection of  new consumer (electrical
network of  new consumer) to  kV(380 ) and /10 kV voltage distribution network
to start reviewing the application and carry out necessary activities for
providing requested connection  Activities for connecting of  new consumer
(electrical network of  new consumer) to  kV (380/220V) and /10 kV distribution
network can be carried out only by the Distribution licensee who provides with
all work and expenses necessary to connect the new consumer (electrical network
of  new consumer) to his own area, including construction of distribution
network, purchasing equipment, design and construction of connection, getting
consent or authorization and all necessary activities and work (including
organizing  metering point and the beginning of electricity supply) related to
the connection of the new consumer to the distribution network and electricity
supply  It is not allowed for the person wishing to connect (applicant) to
purchase necessary facilities for the connection or/and carry out works for
requested connection on the distribution network or take part in getting any
kind of consent or authorization The person wishing to connect (applicant) is
not obliged to submit any additional documentation or information (except the
information given in the application), or attend the beginning of the
electricity supply In the process of connecting  new consumer to the
distribution network, the Distribution licensee is obliged to have relation with
the person wishing to connect (applicant) only through one authorized person
After paying the part of connection fee of  new consumer to the distribution
network, the Distribution licensee is obliged to carry out connection works
(with full technological cycle) of  new consumer (or consumers) to ,220kV,
,380kV and /10kV voltage distribution network: 32 ) In those territorial
boundaries (cities, small towns and villages) where he carries out electricity
distribution activities; ) From existing distribution network;  ) In case of new
consumer of  kV voltage - 800  in radius;  ) In case of new consumer of /10 kV
voltage -  km in radius The connection of  new consumer shall be carried out
according to the required conditions by the person wishing to connect
(applicant) The person wishing to connect ( new consumer) is authorized to
choose (request by application): ) Metering point voltage level, on which
metering point shall be arranged (except for the cases envisaged by Paragraph
of Article 261 of these Rules); ) Connection Capacity on the corresponding
voltage level, where metering point shall be arranged in accordance with the
offered package If after construction of residential apartments, enterprises or
other facilities, three or more new consumers (new consumer' electrical network)
are connected to the distribution network, the amount of connection fee (based
on offered package) shall be determined in compliance with the amount of
capacity to be connected defined (set) by  construction and design documentation
of this facility(facilities) After connecting  residential apartment, enterprise
or other facility to the distribution network and registering those consumers as
subscriber, the Distribution licensee is obliged to deliver service to these
consumers (subscribers) in compliance with terms established by the Commission,
and to carry out accounting and settlement of consumed electricity individually
new consumer connected to the distribution network is not required to submit
special application for registering as  subscriber and repeatedly carry out
activities envisaged by Article  of these Rules Article 261 Procedures for the
Connection of new Consumers to the Distribution Network  In case of construction
of the residential apartment, the enterprise or other object, as well as the
separation of the property (subscriber), when new consumer is connected to the
33 distribution network (according to the Paragraphs ,  and  of Article 26), the
person (or group of persons)should submit the application “For the Connection of
the New Consumer to the Distribution Network” to the Distribution licensee (in
electronic or written form)If the requested connection does not comply with the
definition of the connection of new consumer defined in these Rules, its review
is prohibited according to the Articles 26 and 261 and the Distribution licensee
is obliged to refund the applicant with preliminary paid connection fee within
10 days  Before submission of the application the person wishing to connect
(applicant) is obliged to pay 50 % of the fee outlined in the application for
the connection of new consumer to the distribution network and the rest shall be
paid (if parties has not agreed otherwise) after starting of the electricity
supply:  household consumer – within 20 days;  non-household consumer – within
20 days  Upon receiving the application for connecting to  distribution network
of  new consumer (new consumer’ electricity network), the Distribution licensee
takes obligation to provide  new applicant with necessary service and devices
for electricity supply (with full technological cycle), in compliance with
conditions, envisaged by these Rules and current legislation While connecting to
the distribution network the new applicant takes obligation to pay  fee for the
connection of new consumer to the distribution network and follow the terms
envisaged by the current legislation and these Rules  The person wishing to
connect (applicant) is obliged to make an inquiry (with standard template
approved by the Commission) for new connection to the relevant Distribution
licensee in electronic or written form In addition, the Distribution licensee is
obliged to determine the completeness of the application and the inquiry
described in it and immediately reply to the consumer via SMS, as well as
electronic or written form envisaged in the application (in the case of  defect
refusal must be justified) Otherwise, the application will be accepted  The
Distribution licensee is authorized to determine the defect in the application
for the connection of new consumer to the distribution network (only in cases
envisaged in these Rules) and leave it without examination The reason for the
determination of defect or leaving it without examination can be: application is
not complete or/and it is submitted with error (including, if the application is
not filled in accordance with the standard template approved by the Commission);
in this case the requested connection will be carried out after submission of
the new application 34  In case if error was detected in the application of the
inquiry for the connection of new consumer to the distribution network the
Distribution licensee is obliged to pay back to the applicant the fee for the
connection of new consumer within 10 working days (on the account envisaged in
the application) The person wishing to connect (applicant) is authorized to
request deferral (delay) of the amount paid (with electronic or written form)
with the condition to submit  new application  The period for providing the
network connection of new consumer to the  kV (380 ) and /10 kV includes the
time from submitting the application “For the Connection of the New Consumer to
the Distribution Network” until starting of the electricity supply (according to
the application and these Rules) for new consumer (consumers)In addition, during
determination of the abovementioned period the time of delay for issuing consent
or authorization from administrative body is not considered (without which the
design, construction and / or installation activities is prohibited) In case of
abovementioned situation the Distribution licensee shall immediately notify the
applicant via SMS, or other means envisaged in the application (in electronic or
written form) in order to stop the time flow envisaged for the connection The
time flow will not be stopped if non-issuance of the consent or authorization is
due to incorrect (not corresponding) activity or inactivity of the Distribution
licensee  If providing the connection of new consumer to distribution network is
not finished in provisional time (electricity supply is not started in time) the
connection fee of new consumer is decreased by 50 % In case if application of
person wishing to connect (applicant) “For the Connection of the New Consumer to
the Distribution Network” is left without response by the Distribution Licensee,
50 % discounted fee may be applied (in this case resolution is received by the
Commission after relevant request of the applicant) Accordingly, if  person
already has paid fee for the connection of new consumer the Distribution
licensee shall refund the overpaid amount to the applicant within 10 working
days after this circumstance occurred If providing the connection of new
consumer to distribution network is not finished in provisional time
(electricity supply is not started in time) the Commission is authorized to use
the measures envisaged by the legislation  If the connection of new consumer is
requested for the /19 kV with connection capacity less than 500 kW or technical
conditions is requested for the connection of 35 kV with connection capacity
less than 5000 kW, then this type of connection may be carried out only if there
is  technical necessity on new consumer and if it is obviously impossible to
organize metering point in  lower voltage level 35 If connection of new consumer
or consumers (network of new consumer or consumers) to the distribution network
is requested for 35 kV or more, or if such kind of connection where fee for the
connection of new consumer is not applied, organization of electricity supply
system or/and construction of the connection to the existed electricity
distribution network for this object shall be carried out according to the
mutual agreement between the Distribution licensee and the person wishing to
connect (applicant) ; in case of disagreement the applicant provides all
necessary activities for design and construction (by itself or by another
construction company) Despite of disagreement the Distribution licensee is
obliged to issue Technical Condition for the connection to the distribution
network free of charge within  weeks after receiving of the application
Unilaterally change of the Technical Condition within its period of validity (no
less than one year) is prohibited Technical Condition along with other
information should include the following information:  Connection point;
Connection voltage level;  Connection capacity (according to the project) In
case of connection of 35 kV or more voltage level new consumer or consumers
(network of new consumer or consumers), as well as in case the connection where
fee for the connection of new consumer is not applied, the Distribution licensee
is obliged:  to determine the connection point to the distribution network
according to the relevant voltage level of existing distribution network while
reviewing the application “For the Connection of the New Consumer (electricity
network of new consumer) to the Distribution Network”;  while preparing the
Technical Condition for the existing distribution network, to determine the
connection point and other requirements for the connection according to the
application depending on the technical feasibility in such way that connection
to the distribution network shall be based on the least cost principle;  Despite
the fact who is organizing the electricity supply system of the new consumer or
consumers or/and construction of the connection to the existing electricity
distribution network the metering point shall be organized according to the
condition envisaged in the written requirement of the Distribution licensee; In
case if connection fee of the distribution network is not paid in provisional
time and if agreement occurred between the Distribution licensee and consumer
about redistribution of the connection fee, the Distribution licensee is
authorized to reflect the payment in the debt and act according to the Article
of these Rules 36 Article 27 Increasing the connection capacity on the
distribution network by the consumer  Consumer is obliged to notify to the
Distribution licensee preliminary about increasing the connection capacity on
the distribution network  If consumer, who is connected to the distribution
network of , kV (380 ) and /10 kV voltage capacity, increases the capacity of
actual consumption by more connection capacity than it is envisaged under
Technical Condition, so that change of Technical condition is needed, in such
case the Distribution licensee shall issue  new Technical Condition and arrange
electricity supply system to this consumer (Providing with  full technological
cycle) according to new Technical Conditions In addition, the consumer is
obliged to pay the fee which is calculated as follows: ) If increased
(requested) capacity changes in the other offered package of the connection to
the distribution network, the consumer shall pay the fee for the connection of
new consumer to the distribution network according to the relevant package, from
which is subtracted the fee for the connection of new consumer based on the
offered package that complies with connection capacity under existing Technical
Condition ) If increased (or requested) capacity does not exceed the offered
package for the connection of new consumer to the distribution network that
complies with connection capacity under existing Technical Condition: ) For
providing with requested capacity the Distribution licensee shall reconstruct
electrical network connecting to the consumer and the metering point, or/and
purchase other facilities, construct and install and the consumer shall pay the
fee for the connection of new consumer to the distribution network that is
calculated according to the each kW through dividing the connection fee of
offered package by the maximal capacity and multiplying by additional requested
kW by the consumer; ) If requested capacity does not require reconstruction of
electricity network (which provides connection to the consumer) and metering
point or/and purchase, construction and installation of other utilities, the
consumer shall not pay electricity network connection fee (accordingly, new
Technical Condition is issued by the Distribution licensee free of charge)  If
consumer increases the capacity of actual consumption by more connection
capacity than it is envisaged under Technical Condition so that supply of
requested or actually 37 consumed capacity requires reconstruction of the
electricity network or metering point or/and purchase, construction and
installation of other utilities, in such case for supplying the consumer with
electricity it is required issuance of Technical Condition once again and the
consumers shall meet new Technical Conditions of the connection  Increase of
electricity consumption capacity is attested by the use of same method with
which was defined the consumer’ connection capacity while developing  Technical
Condition of distribution network connection Article 28 Termination of the
contract  Parties in Power Purchase Agreement (except for the Distribution
licensee) are entitled to terminate Power Purchase Agreement for the purpose of
purchasing electricity from other party under these Rules and demands of current
legislation Electricity buyer is entitled to terminate Power Purchase Agreement,
upon notifying corresponding party (parties) prior one month at least
Electricity seller, upon receiving  request from  corresponding party on
termination of Power Purchase Agreement, is obliged to determine the date of
termination of his service (in agreement with the Distribution licensee), which
shall not exceed one calendar month, and inform thereof other parties of
agreement, as well as, electricity Distribution licensee  Termination of Power
Purchase Agreement or/and rendering of service, does not exempt parties from
payments for delivered services or/and consumed electricity Article 29 Price for
restoring of electricity supply to the consumer  The Distribution licensee is
entitled to charge electricity supply restoring payment with the consumer who is
disconnected from the network because of nonpayment of electricity cost, illegal
consumption of electricity or/and violation of safety regulations  Electricity
supply restoring payment does not reflect an exact cost of termination and
restoration of electricity supply for different consumers and its amount is
calculated according to the conventionally assumed costs by the Distribution
licensee Electricity supply restoration payment paid by the consumer represents
the income of the Distribution licensee and the income received will be taken
into account while calculating distribution and transmission tariffs  Price of
restoration of electricity supply to the consumers including VAT is determined
at the level of GEL  38  Charge of electricity supply restoration payment is
impermissible, if termination of electricity supply was not resulted from the
circumstances defined in Paragraph  of this Article If electricity supply to the
consumer was terminated illegally or/and due to other factors, payment was
incorrectly charged, the Distribution licensee is obliged to correct data
without delay, re-calculate and restore electricity supply to the consumer free
of charge Article 30 Non-Household consumers  These Rules apply equally
household as well as non-household consumers, except for the cases envisaged by
this Article  In the application submitted by  non-household consumer for
registering as  subscriber and, correspondingly, the agreement, additionally
shall indicate requested capacity of electricity and forecasted amounts  Upon
temporarily use of  real property by  non-household consumer and supplying with
electricity via network of an owner of the real property, the Distribution
licensee is entitled to request contract in writing about the compensation of
difference between controlling and individual meters The Distribution licensee
is entitled to receive (consider) given contract, if it does not contradict with
the terms envisaged by these Rules  Electricity meter shall be accessible for
the Distribution licensee in the period of working of non-household consumers
and upon any case of emergency - at any time  If for  certain period of time
recording of consumed electricity (with electricity meter) was not held or/and
for this period of time the determination of electricity consumption by  non-
household consumer is impossible (in case of damage of electricity meter), for
unrecorded consumption of electricity, non-household consumer will be charged
with the payment equal to an average monthly consumption of electricity during
months of consumption, when electricity accounting was held properly (with
consideration of operating regime and practicable load conditions of using
utilities and seasonality) This is  one-time charge method and shall not exceed
three months This paragraph does not apply to an illegal consumption envisaged
by these Rules  In case of illegal consumption of electricity by  non-household
consumer: ) when it is impossible to define the amount of illegal consumed
electricity within  calendar day, but the initial date of illegal consumption of
electricity is known, the amount of consumed electricity will be calculated
according to maximum operating power during violation period, with consideration
of operating regime and practicable load conditions of using utilities and
seasonality ) when it is impossible to define the initial date of illegal
consumption of electricity and the amount of illegal consumed electricity within
calendar day, the amount of consumed electricity will be calculated according to
maximum operating power within one month period, based on operating regime and
practicable load conditions of using utilities (with 39 consideration of
seasonality) The amount of electricity charged by this method shall not be less
than average monthly amount of electricity consumption by this consumer in
proper accounting period ) Maximum operating power shall be measured in
conditions of maximum consumption of  normal process cycle or by summarizing of
installed capacities of electrical installations in working condition  The
authorized representative of the Distribution licensee is responsible for the
restoration of electricity supply Article 31 Reporting  The Distribution
licensee is obliged to account separately: ) The income, received from the
payment of connecting  new consumer to the distribution network; ) cost of all
works and services related to connecting  new consumer to the distribution
network, as well as, newly created property (with indication of financial and
technical data and parameters), in accordance with new consumers separately
(voltage and requested capacity) and consolidated; ) Amount of distributed and
passed through electricity due to the connection of  new consumers to the
distribution network and incomes and expenses connected with them  The
Distribution licensee is obliged to submit to the Commission Financial Report
and also separate Financial and Technical Report requested by the given Article
that shall be confirmed with audit report until April  of each year Also, every
three months the Distribution licensee shall present to the Commission operative
data on implementation works for connecting new consumers to the distribution
network  The Distribution licensee is obliged to present to the Commission
Unified register of supply and service for  past period (in accordance with the
form developed by the Commission), in  time-frame of one week from the end of
every three months (quarter) In case of electronic form, under these Rules,
Unified register of electricity supply and service shall be presented to the
Commission until the end of every month (in accordance with the form developed
by the Commission, which must be confirmed by the Distribution licensee and its
electronic version) Article 32 Transitional Provisions  The Distribution
licensee is obliged, in the time-frame of one month, after these Rules enter
into force to adjust all agreements in accordance with these Rules 40  For the
purposes of these Rules, scheduled inspection period for individual electricity
meters, which were installed before these Rules entered into force, will be
determined by passport data-recordings of corresponding electricity meter  If
the consumer possesses high-voltage transformer and metering point is organized
on the side of low-capacity, the payment, before organizing the metering point
on  high- voltage side, shall be executed through metering point organized on
the side of low-capacity (before January  of 2009) In such case, losses in the
consumer’ transformer and in his transmission facilities shall be added to the
amount of accounted electricity Moreover, the Distribution licensees are obliged
to provide shifting of metering point to  high-voltage side, on the segment of
electricity network, where the high-voltage transformer is in the ownership of
the consumer connected to  distribution network  The conditions for connecting
new consumer to  distribution network, envisaged by these Rules, do not apply to
the cases when agreement about connecting was signed between  new consumer and
the Distribution licensee or Technical Conditions about connecting  new consumer
to his network, have been issued by distribution license-holder before these
Rules enter into force  JSC “ENERGO-PRO GEORGIA” is obliged to provide
installation of consumers’ individual metering systems (individual metering
points), in accordance with these Rules and the plan adopted by the Commission
(the plan represents the part of an investment program) JSC “ENERGO-PRO GEORGIA”
is obliged in the time-frame of three months after these Rules enter into force
to present  plan of arrangement of individual metering systems to the Commission
41 ANNEX # POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT  ___ Title of electricity seller
____________________________; Representative of electricity seller
___________________________________; (Position, name, surname) Electricity buyer
(consumer) __________________________________________; (Individual person/legal
person) Address____________________________; Tel:____________________________;
Identification number ___________________________________________________; (In
case of legal person or Individual Entrepreneur or other legal entity)
Electricity consumption price for buyer (consumer) _______ kilowatt-hour (Only
in case of purchasing electricity from low-capacity power plant) Date of
electricity supply commencement ____________________________________; Address
where electricity shall be supplied ______________________________________;
Owner of  distribution network Title of Distribution Licensee _______________;
Requested capacity_________________; Parties agreed to undertake obligation
about providing mutual relations in compliance with Georgian legislation and
“Electricity (Capacity) Supply and Consumption Rules” Electricity buyer
(consumer) is obliged to make settlement for consumed electricity: In case of
purchasing of electricity from  low-capacity power plant – at the electricity
consumption price, envisaged by the agreement In case of purchasing of
electricity from  distribution licensee – at the tariff approved by the Georgian
National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission Electricity buyer
(consumer) is obliged to purchase and consume electricity only for
_______________ (household or non-household) purposes Seller is obliged to
ensure safe, uninterrupted, reliable and high quality electricity supply, in
accordance with the legislation, terms of license and responsibilities under the
agreement 42 Electricity buyer (consumer) is obliged to pay electricity price in
time Seller is obliged to require from electricity buyer (consumer) to cover
cost of electricity after determining the payment term and reflecting the
monthly payment in the bill Signature of electricity buyer (consumer):
___________________________ Signature of electricity seller:
_____________________“___“ _____________200_ Remark: In case of non-household
consumer, agreement can be attached with time schedule of annual, monthly, daily
and hourly forecasts of electricity supply and consumption 43 ANNEX #  Potential
capacity for the consumer' receivers and hourly computing table of these
capacities  Electricity Receiver Working hours (Day and Monthly service hours
Installed Night) capacity Summer time (April- October)  Winter time (November-
March)  Summer time (April- October) 30 Winter time (November- March) 60
Electric fryer: - Stationary - Portable , ,  Water heater with tank   60 90 ,
Heater with flowing water Air conditioner “summer”   30 30 ,   - 60 - ,  Air
conditioner “summer winter” Water pomp   60 60 ,  - - 20 20 ,  Washing machine -
- 10 10 ,  Computer   60 60 ,  Electric radiator -  - 120 , 10 Electric boiling
pan , ,   , Electric iron , 11 ,   , Electric lighting  12  120 180 , 13 Fan , -
60 - ,05 14 Refrigerator   180 120 ,13 15 TV   120 120 , 44 Remark: If passport
data of electricity passport is unknown, we can use installed capacity, which is
shown in table ANNEX # Fee for the connection new consumer to the distribution
network on the ,220 kV, ,380 kV and /10 kV voltage levels  Proposed packages for
calculating of Fee for the connection new consumer to connect distribution
network by ,220 kV, ,380 kV and /10 kV: ) In case of connecting new consumer (to
start the electricity supply in defined time) to distribution network in defined
period of time: Voltage Levels Capacity, kW Connecting period to  Connection fee
distribution network for for  new new consumer consumer, including VAT (Calendar
day) GEL 220 -10 35 400 -10 35 1200  40 4700  40 7000  45 10500 45  45 12000  45
14000  45 21500  60 33000 380  60 50500  90 80000  90 100000 -500 60 48500  90
94000  90 137000 -10  90 177000  90 257500  90 416000 ) If connection of new
consumer to distribution network take longer time than it is defined in these
Rules (not to start the electricity supply in defined time), consumer will pay
50% of fee (according to the proposed packages)  If construction of the network
for requested connection to the distribution network does not require any
consent or authorization, connecting period of new consumer will be for ,220 kV
and ,380 kV voltage - 20 days, and for /10 kV voltage level - 40 days Applicant
46 must be notified about this information along with notification about
completeness of the application in written or electronic form 47