Hydropower Investment Promotion Project (HIPP) RENEWABLE ENERGY ROAD MAP FOR
GEORGIA DRAFT, August 2013 This publication was produced for review by the
United States Agency for International Development It was prepared by Deloitte
Consulting LLP RENEWABLE ENERGY ROAD MAP FOR GEORGIA AUGUST , 2013 USAID
HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP) CONTRACT NUMBER: EEM---00005-
DELOITTE CONSULTING LLP USAID/CAUCASUS OFFICE OF ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT This
document was prepared by Authors Organization Contact Details Dan Potash
Reviewer Deloitte Consulting LLP Organization dpotash@deloittecom Contact
Details Jake Delphia Deloitte Consulting LLP Deloitte Consulting Overseas
Projects LLC Deloitte Consulting Overseas Projects LLC jdelphia@deloittecom Mari
Ioseliani mioseliani@dcop-hippge Elene Ghubianuri eghubianuri@dcop-hippge
HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP)  TABLE OF CONTENTS  BACKGROUND
RENEWABLE ENERGY POTENTIAL IN GEORGIA   WORLDWIDE BEST PRACTICES  RE CURRENT
LEGAL FRAMEWORK IN GEORGIA10 Gaps concerning Renewable Energy regulation 11
World Bank Table of Indicators for Investing in  RE and HIPP View of Georgia 12
Renewable Energy Legal Framework Needed in Georgia  13   EU REQUIREMENTS14  ROAD
MAP FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY IN GEORGIA 16 Five-Year Road Map  16 Next Year Road Map
16   HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP) ii Definition of
Abbreviations ACER Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators BSTP Black
Sea Transmission Project EC Energy Community ENTSO- European Network of
Transmission System Operators for Electricity (formerly the UCTE) ESCO
Electricity System Commercial Operator ESP Energy Service Providers EU European
Union FiT Feed-in Tariff FCA Forward Capacity Auction GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEL Georgian Lari (the currency) GEMM Georgian Electricity Market Model GNERC
Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulation Commission GoG Government
of Georgia GSE Georgian State Electrosystem IOU Investor Owned Utility ISO
Independent System Operator KPI Key Performance Indicator kV Kilovolt kWh
Kilowatt-hour LSE Load Serving Entity (same as  DSO, Distribution Syste erator)
LTPP Utility Long Term Procurement Planning MoE Ministry of Energy MENRP
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Protection MoESD MoF MOO Ministry
of Economy and Sustainable Development Ministry of Finance Must Offer Obligation
MV Medium Voltage MWh Megawatt-hour NRA National Regulatory Authority or Agency
PU Public Utility RA Resource Adequacy RE Renewable Energy REAP Renewable Energy
Action Plan (or NREAP, National Renewable Energy Action Plan) RES Renewable
Energy Sources RMR Reliability Must Run ROI Return on Investment SEE South East
Europe SHPP Small Hydro Power Project SO Service Obligation TEAIS Turkish
Electricity Transmission Company TSO Transmission System Operator USAID United
State Agency for International Development HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION
PROJECT (HIPP)   Watt Wh Watt-hour  Background This document was compiled by
USAID-funded advisory project, Hydropower Investment Promotion Project The HIPP
project supports the Government of Georgia to attract investment from the
private sector in modern, efficient hydropower plants Since March, 2010, HIPP
has supported market-based initiatives to promote and secure international
investments into Georgia’ small and medium-sized hydroelectric power market This
document concerns the issue of renewable energy planning and implementation, in
the context of Georgia implementing  competitive power market model (“Georgian
Electricity Market Model,” or GEMM) Renewable Energy (“RE”) in this discussion
means generation of electricity from large and small hydroelectricity, wind,
solar, biomass, and geothermalThe primary focus of this document concerns grid-
connected renewable power projects Georgia is introducing  competitive power
market and therwise enhancing and reforming its electric power sector for four
main reasons: • • To secure domestic power supply for Georgia’ population and
industry To avail significant private investment for export-oriented hydropower
plants located in Georgia To engage in beneficial electricity trade with
Georgia’ immediate neighbors: Turkey, Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Russia To
harmonize and connect with the European Union for mutually beneficial
electricity trade • • In January of 2013, Georgia applied to become  member of
the European Energy Community Georgia has been an observer of the treaty since
December The Energy Community consists of countries that have agreed on  common,
stable regulatory and market framework in order to: • Attract investment in
power generation and networks in order to ensure stable and continuous energy
supply that is essential for economic development and social stability; Create
an integrated energy market allowing for cross-border energy trade and
integration with the EU market; Enhance the security of supply; Improve the
environmental situation in relation with energy supply in the region; Enhance
competition at regional level and exploit economies of scale • • • • Georgia’
application is subject to negotiation expected to begin in later part of 2013,
and should end with an agreed upon set on legal and policy actions that Georgia
must undertake in order to join the Energy Community HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT
PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP)  The issue of renewable energy implementation figures
into many, indeed, virtually all planning dimensions in the power sector
worldwide and especially in the EU and Georgia It affects many different issues
such as: • Creating major new transmission linkages, since major renewable
resources are often located far from load centers; Managing the intermittent
nature of major renewable resources, including arranging for backup replacement
generation; Integrating and paying for the financial impact of renewable energy
that is more expensive and has  high up-front cost; and, Capturing and
monetizing the environmental benefit of carbon avoidance • • • The end product
for this report is  proposed Road Map for Renewable Energy –  suite of targeted,
practical actions – that can serve as  point of departure for stakeholders The
responsibility of completely implementing renewable energy falls across several
Georgian agencies, which need to work cooperatively and need to respect the
goals and constraints of eachother and each stakeholder Especially as it relates
to permitting there are important boundaries and interests with respect to
environmental protection, labor, and consumers In  deregulated environment, when
bringing in new renewable generation capacity, it is critically important to
gain the benefits of competitive pressures to lower costs, while adhering to
policy goals for renewables The impact of deregulation and cross- border
interdependence has  potentially big effect, due to renewable resources in
countries outside the EU, and that may count towards meeting EU Member States’
goals for renewable energy production This portends  good opportunity for
countries blessed with high amounts of renewable energy resources, like Georgia,
and that are hoping to serve the EU Since 2003, the EU has been making rules to
create  common electricity market including cross-border trading This has
required that each EU Member Country, and other bordering countries, meet strict
technical, legal, regulatory and financial standards One of the most significant
requirements in the EU “Third Package” is the 20 goal, shown in Figure  These
goals are EU-wide and will shortly extend to Turkey In 2011, Turkey joined the
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity and harmonized
its legislation with EU directives to allow cross-border trading Assuming that
Georgia similarly legislates and conforms to the EU rules, there is an
attractive economic opportunity for Georgia to be  significant regional energy
exporter of renewable energy  See:  HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT
(HIPP)  Figure : Renewable Energy Goals in Europe 20% reduction in EU greenhouse
gas emissions from 1990 levels Raising the share of EU energy consumption
produced from renewable resources to 20%; 20% improvement in the EU' energy
efficiency Georgia is strategically located to access neighboring and regional
power markets In Figure , “Electricity Markets,” Georgia is shown in bright
green, north of Azerbaijan and Armenia, and northwest of Turkey Georgia’
immediate neighbors could potentially find great value from Georgia’
hydroelectric resources Turkey’ electricity is largely fueled by natural gas and
coal Azerbaijan’ power sector is largely run on oil and natural gas Armenia is
run primarily on nuclear and natural gas; Nuclear serves about 35% of the total
system energy Armenia recently put in to place two new gas-fired combined cycle
units, which displaces old theremal power units From  utility planning
viewpoint, Georgia’ regiona ibution offers valuable fuel diversity and cost
reduction, especially as fossil fuel prices rise Figure : Electricity Markets
Also, the priority of renewable energy development in Europe may confer on
Georgia’ hydropower plants special higher value, because of the need caused by
wind and solar intermittency, with some level of flexibility of delivery The
main problem with overall investment planning in the power sector, but
especially with regard to renewable energy generation, has to do with the
priority and sequence of decision: whether to secure transmission capacity
before securing  site and  PPA to build generation, or whether to secure  ion
and  PPA before securing transmission capacity Policy makers around the world
are wrestling with this issue, especially so as to induce the higher amount of
renewable generation that is often located far from load centers HYDROPOWER
INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP)  In order to create  Georgian competitive
market for electricity, more reforms are needed, with concomitant investment in
transmission resources, and which offer economic choices and flexibility for
producers and consumers These additional reforms will require changes concerning
technical matters, new laws, and regulatory and financial improvements Although
the challenges are daunting, there are well- established formats and structures
being developed worldwide, and specifically by the European Union There now is
body of experience from countries that have made the requisite changes in their
power sectors, and have joined the EU common market structure, such as in
Bulgaria Georgian policy-makers need to take near-term and medium-term actions
to induce the investment in Renewable Energy sought This document outlines more
detail about renewable energy planning in the power sector It provides the
current status regarding each issue in Georgia, the relevant worldwide best
practices and EU requirements, and  suggested Road Map for Renewable Energy
delineating activities for Georgian policy-makers, regulators, and power systems
operators  Renewable Energy Potential in Georgia Relative to existing demand,
there is significant potential form RE in Georgia from hydro The analysis
indicates that added new hydro will provide excess power that may be exported
The following chart shows that in 2013, current hydro and current thermal
generation is about equal to Projected Demand at 10 billion kWh per year Note
that the effects of imports, exports, and transmission losses, total to net out
at approximately no effect Projected Demand is the demand of distribution
companies and bulk customers We assumed  % growth rate of demand HYDROPOWER
INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP)  However  problem with hydro, relative to
serving domestic Georgian demand, is that hydro fluctuates seasonally, as shown
in the following chart As  result of the seasonality of natural hydro flows,
Georgia has to import power in winter, and has excess capacity so as to export
in the summer This is shown in the graph below Besides hydroelectric projects,
there is also good potential for others types of renewable energy The following
chart shows the potential of other types of renewable energy in Georgia,
indicating that resources are significant relative to existing demand This is
especially important because of the seasonality of hydro, demonstrated above
HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP)  Renewable Energy Potential of
Georgia (excluding hydro) 14 12 2013 Actual Energy Demand in Georgia Geothermal
10        Biomass  Solar Wind        Source: Estimates of Georgian Energy
Academy, Fall 2007   Annual Energy Production Clearly there is good potential
for RE in Georgia, for domestic use and enough for export Another consideration
in the application of RE is of course price While the cost of wind and solar may
exceed average cost, Georgia has many hydro sites that offer compelling
economics The following chart illustrates that latest new hydro (deregulated
HPPs) have  delivered energy prices about 20% lower than existing thermal
projects running on subsidized natural gas These results are possible because
the plants have relatively low capital costs (due to they are run-of-the-river
design not having  large dam ) and have relatively high capacity factors
HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP)   Worldwide Best Practices
Policy-makers and power sector officials are continually devising innovative
ways to encrouage, reward, or mandate more producton and use of renewable energy
There are essentially (only) two ways to create  greater amount of renewable
energy as  portion of the supply portfolio, involving: ) price, or ) volume The
volume way is to mandate that  greater share of renewable energy be used,in
terms of  percentage of total energy The price way is to give as price
preference so that renewable energy has relatively more value There are
advantages and disadvantages to each of the two overall approaches, and the
approaches may be used in combination, along with other inducements •Feed in
Tariff •Green Tags •Cap and Trade Price Measures Ways to increase production of
renew able energy •Renewable Portfolio Standard •Must-take Power Purchase
Obligation •Public Service Obligation Volume Measures These approaches are
discussed briefly below; ) RPS, Renewable Portfolio Standard, require an amount
of renewable, all- source renewable or by technology, diversity of supply An RPS
may be done on  regional or national basis, and in the case of the EU it is done
continental basis Usually there is  definition on renewable energy that includes
wind and solar and small hydro, but usually excludes large hydro Note that an
RPS defines renewable energy production  the amount of energy produced, not
based on the installed capacity This is because solar and wind have relatively
low capacity factors, in the range of 20% and 30%, respectively, for wind and
solar The RPS approach is consistent with power sector best practices that seek
to balance all resources HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP)  and to
avoid overdependence on certain technologies or too much on one or  few power
plants ) Must-take Power Purchase Obligation In  single buyer environment, the
single buyer, or some centralized buyer (like ESCO) is obligated to take and pay
for RE from eligible projects This approach was more workable when the amount of
renewable energy was essentially negligent as component of overall power supply
Now it is widely being abandoned as the percentage of renewable energy
increases, and  blanket obligation is too inflexible and may be deleterious to
ratepayers ) Public Service Obligation In  bilateral contracts environment, when
distribution company is obligated to purchase  share of the energy from RE
projects This may be more beneficial than must-take power purchase obligation
because the support obligation for RE could show up clearly on customers’
billing statement, as is done in the EU And it is more consistent with  bi-
lateral contracting market structure ) FiT, Feed-in tariffs, floors, ceilings,
RFP’ for capacity, capacity limitations, trade off cost versus diversity of
supply  Feed-in-Tariff is  pre-set price for power, usually with the same
definition as given above for RPS FiT is simple in principle but can be devilish
to implement An instantly presenting difficulty is what price to set – each
technology generally needs  different price and each location needs  different
Some countries have made FiT’ based on different underlying financing Ultimately
FiT can be so specific that it effectively becomes  type of cost-of-service
regulation, and which defeats the purpose Secondly an overall problem with the
Feed-in-Tariff is that it is hard to preempt  windfall and excess development,
as has happened in Germany, Italy, and Spain Since ESCO buys power from new RE
for ten years using  formula based on replacement of Gardabani electricity
production costs, there is not too much risk of excessive payments to RE with
locked-in contracts ) Green tags, (relates to Guarantee of Origin) adding
premium payment This is an approach that provides  tradable and verifiable
mechanism to give  premium payment to renewable energy producers It is ctive
tool because it separates out, and gives flexibility for monetizing the value of
renewable energy production The “brown energy” can sold where it has the most
value and the “green component” can be sold where it has the most value Thus the
green tag modality has the most compatibility with  market approach, and
maximizing consumer economic value HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT
(HIPP)  ) Cap and trade, trading certificates, tax benefits The cap and trade
approach refers to artificially creating  fixed amount of some allowance, such
as allowance to emit greenhouse gases Then such rights to emit can be sold or
traded This allows free approach to reducing emissions based on new technologies
or selling to another party with  clever idea or market mechanism to absorb the
allowance Tax benefits refer some kind of offset against other taxes owed:
corporate or income taxes These offsets can arise from investment tax credits
for making  certain kind of investment, accelerated depreciation benefits, or
tax credit based on production of energy from renewable facilities In general,
tax benefits are  useful investment motivation in  country with high tax rates
and  culture of actually paying taxes Therefore, in many countries tax benefits
are not an effective policy tool Some other worldwide best practices can relate
to link wable energy facilities to job creation, and requiring manufacturing to
be set up locally, buying local content, and customs duties relief  RE Current
Legal Framework in Georgia ) 2008 Georgia Energy Policy (latest most relevant) )
Government resolution “Renewable Energy 2008” – establishes  standard form and
process for renewable energy project development This Resolution sets aside
winter season (time of peak demand) so that new hydroelectric plants can be used
only for domestic Georgian use ii) Sets forth  standard application process for
developers to follow for proposing and implementing projects iii) Provides for
developers to gain exclusive rights to  project site, and requires them to post
bank guarantee to back up the commitment to install the power plant on  date-
certain basis iv) This policy did not draw investment as anticipated, because
developers could not get comfortable with many different elements of the off-
take risks ) No licensing under 13 MW for SHPP (“Small Hydro Power Project”) )
Electricity Market Rules (Approved 2006, last amended April, 2013) ) Total
deregulation for SHPP under 13 MW ii) Right to retail sales for SHPP iii)
Preferential price scheme when selling to ESCO for SHPP HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT
PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP) 10 ) Law of Georgia on Electricity and Natural Gas )
One of the objectives of the Law is to encourage the priority use of indigenous
hydro, other renewable, alternative and gas resources ii) One of the Ministry of
Energy’ main functions will be urage the priority use of indigenous hydro,
renewable, alternative and gas resources, which is already  priority under the
State Program Renewable Energy ) Georgian National Energy and Water Supply
Regulation Commission (GNERC) has important responsibilities including
licensing, power sales contract compliance with Market Rules, and importantly,
consumer protection from inappropriate or excess charges from any generation
source and any investror including those in renewable energy The main functions
of the GNERC may be found in Article  of the Law on Electricity and Natural Gas
These functions are the following: ) The establishment of rules and conditions
for granting generation, transmission, dispatch, distribution, as well as
natural gas transportation and distribution licenses, also the granting,
modification and revocation of licenses in compliance with the Law of Georgia on
Licenses and Permits, this Law and licensing rules; ii) The setting and
regulation of tariffs for electricity generation, transmission, dispatch,
distribution, transit, import and consumption,  system commercial operator
service and System Capacity Reserve to be purchased under the mandatory rule by
the system commercial operator, also the setting and regulation of tariffs on
natural gas transportation, distribution delivery and consumption, excluding
tariffs on natural gas sold at gas filling stations, pursuant to this Law, main
directions of the state policy in the energy sector, the administrative legal
acts adopted based on them and the established methodology iii) Within its
competence, the settlement of disputes aris ween licensees, small hydropower
stations, importers, exporters, suppliers and consumers, also the commercial
system operator; iv) The establishment of control over the meeting of licen
conditions within the electricity and natural gas sectors of Georgia and
application of relevant administrative sanctions for violation of the conditions
in keeping with law; ) Gaps: There is no Law of Georgia on “Renewable Energy
Sources” which has been adopted as of yet An inadequate draft was circulated and
it is our understanding that it is being wholly revamped  Gaps concerning
Renewable Energy regulation While hydro power investment has been forthcoming,
that has been based on supportive legal framework and policy security indicated
by GEMM HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP) 11 The only document
regulating renewable energy related issues (Renewable Energy) is Government
Resolution of This Resolution is  secondary legislation of Georgia Based on
investor workshops and individual contacts carried out by HIPP project in , some
gaps were identified, based on the concerns voiced by investors, namely: • • • •
• • • Renewable Energy related issues are not covered by the primary
legislation; Amount of requested bank gauarantee is too high; No state
guarantees are provided; No support mechanisms in place to develop Renewable
Energy; No action plan approved by the GoG; No preferential tariff exists for
Renewable Energy; Lack of priority access to the interconnection line to Turkey
In order to fill these gaps, it is important that the primary legislation be in
placeThe HIPP findings are consistent with the World Bank 2012 Report “Assessing
the Investment Climate for Climate Investment,” which listed the following
indicators as critically important in attracting renewable energy:  World Bank
Table of Indicators for Investing in RE and HIPP View of Georgia World Bank
Indicators for Creating  Positiv  Inv estment Clim ate and Sector-Specific
Indicators for Solar PV,  ind, Biom ass and Sm all Hydro Status in Georgia as
per HIPP  udgment No Existence of RE Policy and Law RE Policy RE Law Existence
of RE Target RE Purchase/Off-take Obligation Availability of Tradable
Instruments for RE Preferential Tariffs for Solar/Wind/Biomass/Small Hydro
Grants/Subsidies/Incentives related to Capital / Investment Tax Credits
Incentives Linked to Generation/Production Tax-credits Income Tax
Holidays/Exemptions Trade-related Incentives Customs Duty Exemptions Absence of
Local Content Requirements Other Tax Exemptions (VAT, Excise etc)  No Weak2 No
No No No No      No No No No No Yes3    10 11 12 Clearly, according to the World
Bank Criteria, Georgia has significant work to do in regard to the legal and
policy support for RE   Government resolution was issued in 2008, establishing
development process specifically for certain hydropower investments, setting
forth some limitations on sales during winter months, bank guarantees as
placeholder to hold the investment It does not cover access to the grid, power
purchase obligation, feed in tariff  There are VAT exemptions for equipment that
was financed under concessional terms, and for sales of electricity from newly
created power plants HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP) 12  Renew
able Energy Legal Framew ork Needed in Georgia It is anticpated the primary
legislation will be  standalone law concerning renewable energy to be finalized
in 2013, (“RE Law”) RE Law and related policy will be set forth according
normative acts of Georgia Normative Acts are divided into legislative normative
acts of Georgia and sub legislative normative acts, which, together, form the
legislation framework Legislative normative acts are primary legislation while
sub legislative normative acts represent secondary legislation The types of
primary legislation in Georgia are:  The Constitution of Georgia; the
Constitutional Law of Georgia;  An Organic Law of Georgia;  Laws of Georgia,
Decrees of the President of Georgia, lations of the Parliament of Georgia Sub
legislative normative acts of Georgia are the Orders of the Ministers,
Resolutions, Regulations, etc For example, resolutions of GENRC are sub
legislative normative acts Legislative normative acts have prevailing legal
force over sub legislative normative acts  sub legislative normative act has to
specify the legislative normative act that serves as the basis of which the sub
legislative normative act was issued The procedure for the adoption of the
primary legislat is the following: once the Law is drafted it has to be
circulated among several Ministries The Ministries are given time to review the
draft and comment on it Then the final draft is sent to the Cabinet of Ministers
When the draft is ready at the Cabinet of Ministers, it is submitted to the
Parliament of Georgia Then the Parliament Committees start reviewing the draft
Law Once the internal reviews are finished the hearings take place After the
third reading of the Law, the Law is nt to the President of Georgia for its
signature The President has  right to veto the draft law or make changes and
send it back to the Parliament within  days Parliament may accept the changes
and submit the Law back to the President for signature within  day term When the
the Official Gazette – Law is signed during 24 hours it “Sakanonmdeblo Matsne”
The Law enters into force on the day of its publishing or another date specified
is published in The Parliament sessions last for three months Autumn sion starts
in September and finishes by the end of third week of December and spring
session starts in February and finishes by the end of third week of June It is
also possible to hold extraordinary sessions but the latter depends on the
urgency and state interest in the Law which has to be adopted For RE, below are
presented the relevant issues, and recommended handling, which falls either into
primary or secondary legislation HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP)
13 RE Issue Primar  Legislation Secondary Legislation Targets Amounts or
percentage supply from RE Will be an obligation under ? the RE Law Action Plan
itself National Action Plan for developing for RE Will be an obligation ? ?
under the RE Law Municipal Action Plans for promotion of Renewable Energy Public
Service ? Obligationsevel Public Service Obligations, that energy purchasers get
minimum amount of supply from RE Would be  GoG ? resoultion or from GNERC Should
be Action Plan Supporting schemes, such as allocating state-owned land to
projects, Feed-in Tariff ? GoG Resolution Expression of Interest/MOU procedures
? Guarantee of Origin Would be  GNERC ? resolution Responsible authorities /
administrative procedures, , roles of GoG ministries Action Plan, GoG ?
resolution Priority access to grid Obligation under RE Law Covered in Market
Rules, ? ? need sto be amended;  GNERC responsibility Reporting Obligation under
RE Law ? May be done by Analytics ? Department in MoE  EU Requirements Georgia
requested to join the Energy Community in January Discussisons were held and now
GoG is waiting for the Energy Community to provide more specific guidance in the
form of an “Energy Road Map” The Energy Road Map will concern all aspects of
legal and regulatory energy framework (including RE), such as generation,
tranmission, energy for transport, energy efficiency, and other topics The
following points are key elements of the Energy Community, with which Georgia
will have to comply, as it relates to RE ) Directive 2009/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council, 23 April 2009, on the promotion of the use of
energy from renewable sources ) Requires the EU as  whole to achieve 20% usage
of renewable energy by This is an RPS requirement as noted above As Georgia will
begin negotiations with Community, each country’ target depends on individual
country case and data (GDP, natural resources, etc) Therefore each country’
target is the subject of negotiation HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT
(HIPP) 14 ii) Calls for each country to adopt  National Renewable Energy Action
Plan iii) Joint cooperation between EU states and states outside EU Between EU
states, there can be statistical transfers between Member States, for the
purpose of calculating the share of energy from renewable sources Notes that
this statistical transfer may ultimately have an important benefit for Georgia
due to its abundant hydro Even without Georgia being  full member of the EU, the
directive states that “One or more Member States may cooperate with one or more
third countries on all types of joint projects regarding the production of
electricity from renewable energy sources” iv) Ensure that origin of electricity
produced from renewable energy sources can be guaranteed ) Ensure access to the
grid and priority or guaranteed transmission for renewable energy generation to
reach market vi) Priority dispatch of renewable energy vii) Transmission system
provide cost and timing to proposed renewable projects viii)Biannual reporting
on progress on renewable sources to be submitted until December 31, ) Directive
2009/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, 23 April 2009, to improve
the and extend the greenhouse gas emissi llowance trading scheme ) The purpose
of the directive is to “prevent dangerous anthropomorphic interference with the
climate system” ii) Affirms the 20% target of using renewable energy iii)
Establishes the concept of tradable renewable energyneeding
definitive“certificates of origin” ) European Parliament legislative resolution
of 17 December 2008 states that “Imported electricity, produced from renewable
energy sources outside the Community, may count towards Member States' targets”
HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP) 15  Road Map for Renewable Energy
in Georgia Renewable energy planning requires expertise in the spheres of legal,
financial and economic matters As it regards secondary legislation necessary to
implement EU framework with respect to, the MoE and GNERC must each have
specialized expert knowledge on EU legislation as each must complete diff
gislation compliant with EU energy acquis More information on this will be known
upon completion of the final Energy Community roadmap agreed between the GoG and
the EU  Five-Year Road Map The Road Map presented below is meant to indicate
general priorities In practice, some tasks may proceed on  parallel execution
Near-term Measures Longer-term Measures Revise Electricity and Natural Gas Law &
Regulation - Grid Access Renew able Energy Law Long-term technology review and
support Financing Sources & Methods; PPP / Microfinance Prepare Renew able
Energy Law Anticipating EC Roadmap PSO Obligation Examine Heating and Cooling;
Transport Sector (biofuels) RE Capacity Building and Educational Programs
National Renew able Energy Action Plan  Next Year Road Map Some near term
actions  for Renewable Energy are: ) MoE drafts primary legislation in
consultation with key stakeholders Most critical issues are: ) Need to define
“renewable energy” by technology ii) Government obligations, such as National
Renewable Energy Action Plan iii) Guarantee of Origin that GNERC would
administer iv) Priority dispatch, curtailment limitations, access to the export
line to Turkey HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP) 16 ) The
categorization of large hydro and small hydro should be established (, above 100
MW is large hydro and 100 MW and below is small hydro ) GNERC sets up
application process and registry for Guarantee of Origin ) MoE conduct long-
range market study of economic opportunity to add modest hydro storage so as to
develop flexible dispatchable hydro power ) GNERC explore end-user green energy
option ) MoE explore public private partnerships so investors can join project
at lower risk later; develop  planning database of projects in the pipeline )
MoE setting up  RPS, in totality for renewable and by technology ) MoE begin
drafting Action Plan consistent with EU Directives ) GNERC review framework for
licensing RE: ) Assurance that only power plants are built under market-based,
arms- length, freely-contracted PPA’, or for overall system reliability under
appropriate process , to protect Georgian ratepayer This is to prevent
“sweetheart” deals negotiated not transparently ii) One regulatory permit,
consider  “one-window” framework for permitting that establishes  unified
organization for application, project selection, auctioning sites, and
coordinating permitting iii)  decision within  specific time frame iv) Ensure
that there is  full opportunity for open participation in workshops by general
public and by special interest groups ) GNERC and MoE should correlate the
process for energy project permitting with other laws and amend laws regarding,
for example, environment, construction, labor, and taxation, local content, in
order to streamline project permitting and accelerate bringing projects online
Strengthen the requirements for performance if  developer is awarded rights to
site ) MoE undertake optimization and management of energy production,
accounting for the needs of other water users: agriculture and water supply )
MoE assess linkages to university programs and/or other opportunity for
specialized training in renewable energy technologies and hydroelectric plant
operations, to retain and employ local Georgian skilled professionals, evaluate
and possibly set up educational Centers of Excellence, akin to the Azerbaijan
State Oil Academy ) MEPNR carry forward the previously done analyses of carbon
credits as  potential financing tool for HPP investments in Georgia and of the
EU as  potential market for Georgian hydropower which indicates the following
necessary and useful tasks ) Develop  clear road map for developers to use in
monetizing carbon credits There is some evidence that  developers have not been
able to navigate the steps needed in  timely manner with the appropriate parties
ii) Training on: transaction structuring, EU Emissions trading schemes,
compliance markets, voluntary markets, working with the Energy HYDROPOWER
INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT (HIPP) 17 Community, accessing KfW Carbon Fund and
other sources, and implications of bi-lateral and third-country trading iii)
Support projects with an information hub, and project tracking support, making
cell within the existing Climate Change Division of the MEPNR as  “one-stop
shop” This would include  contact information network for ensuring that all
possible sources of carbon revenue are tapped HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION
PROJECT (HIPP) 18 USAID Hydropower Investment Promotion Project (USAID-HIPP)
Deloitte Consulting Overseas Projects - HIPP 11 Apakidze Street, Tiflis Business
Center Tbilisi, 0171, Georgia