Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission Resolution N14
July 30 2014 Tbilisi On approving Electricity Tariff Calculation Methodologies
Under the Article  () and Article  of the Law of Georgia on Electricity and
Natural Gas, Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission
establishes the following:  Tariff Setting Methodology for Electricity
Distribution, Pass Through and Consumption Tariffs shall be approved (Annex N1)
Tariff Setting Methodology for Electricity Generation, Transmission, Dispatch
and Electricity Market Operator Service shall be approved (Annex N2)  Regulated
assets depreciation/amortization rates of utilities under tariff regulation
shall be approved (Annex N3)  This resolution shall enter into force on the date
of its publication  Upon entry into force of this resolution the resolution of
June  2011  11 on adoption of Electricity Tariff Setting Methodologies shall be
declared invalid Irina Milorava Chair of Georgian National Energy and Water
Supply Regulatory Commission Maia Nadiradze Commisioner Gocha Shonia Sergo
Meskhi Commisioner Commisioner  Annex N1 Tariff Setting Methodology for
Electricity Distribution, Pass Through and Consumption Tariffs CHAPTER  GENERAL
PROVISIONS Article  Purpose  Purpose of the Electricity Distribution, Pass
thourgh and Consumtion Tariff Methodology (thereafter “the Methodology”) is to
define rules and principles for setting electricity tariff in accordance with
the Law of Georgia on Electricty and Natural Gas, which should be thereafter
used for setting tariffs for electricity distribution, pass through and
consumption  Tariff setting based on this Methodology is in accordance with the
international practice of incentive regulation (marginal price regulation)
principles, which stimulates increase of the efficiency of the utilities Article
Definitions  The terms used in this methodlogy have the same meanining as in the
Law of Georgia on Electricity and Natural Gas  Other terms used in this
methodology for the tariff regulation purposes have the following meaning: )
Intangible assets– identifiable, non-monetary assets without physical form
including patent, trade mark, goodwill, software, license and other types of
intangible assets; ) Non Controllable Operational Expenses (ncOPEX)– costs that
occur due to external factors and which cannot be influenced by the utility; )
Assets – tangible and intangible assets; ) Asset replacement costs - total
amount of expenses, which needs to be evaluated in order to create similar
asset; ) Asset cost – the real value of payments in money or money equivalents
or other compensation during the creation or the first purchase of an asset; )
Historic cost asset valuation method – Asset cost evaluation using the price of
its creation or the first purchase; ) Reasonable costs – cost incurred in
accordance with the minimum cost principles, which is rational and nessesary for
the effective functioning of the utility;  ) Cost audit – regulations
mechanisms, by means of which the commission or/and neutral third party set
reasonable costs incurred by the utility and define regulatory asset base; )
Cost cascading method –allocation of the costs of the upper voltage levels of
the distribution grid to costs of the next voltage levels; ) Electricity
distribution tariff – distribution service price for providing distribution
service to the customer via the distribution grid; ) Electricity pass through
tariff – price of the pass through service provided by the distribution licensee
via the distribution grid for passing through electricity which belongs to other
entities; ) Electricity consumption tariff – price of electricity consumed by
the retail customer; ) Electricity normative loss – allowed technical loss of
energy which occurs while transporting energy via distribution grids; )
Electricity extra normative loss – positive difference between the factual and
normative loss rates set by GNERC for the distribution grids; ) Electricity
factual loss – difference between the volumes of electricity received and
distributed via the distribution grids, calculated based on the readings of the
metering devices; ) Efficiency factor (-factor) - rate of increase of
productivity and operational efficiency of utility, which includes the general
efficiency factor (Xgen) and individual efficiency factor (Xind) ) General
efficiency factor (Xgen)- rate of increase of the concrete sector' efficiency; )
) Individual efficiency factor (Xind) - rate of increase of the concrete
utility’ efficiency; Investment –capital investment which is used for creating,
purchasing or/and rehabilitation of assets, the useful life of which, is more
than one year; ) Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) – rate of return based
on regulatory assets, calculated before taxes, according to the capital
structure of the company (own and attracted capital); ) Capital Expenses (CAPEX)
- return on Regulatory Asset Base and depreciation/amortization, for the purpose
of this Methodology; ) Controllable Operational Expenses (cOPEX)– costs that
occur due to internal factors which can be controlled by the company; ) Tangible
Assets – major assets used by the company for the regulated activity, including
land, buildings, machinery, equipment and other main assets the useful life of
which is more than one year; ) Third party- any individual or legal person
(including  State, customer, etc), which provides subsidy to the utility, gives
grant, pays fees for the connection to the electricity transmission network
and/or gives tangible and intagible assets to the utility for free ) Regulated
activity – for the purpose of this Methodology activities of the electricity
distribution and pass through, regulated by the Commission in accordance with
the Law of Georgia on Electricity and Natural Gas; ) Regulatory Cost base (RCB)
– allowed income for the utility set by the Commission for the Tariff Year,
which is necessary for the effective functioning of the utility and includes
reasonable costs and rational profit; aa) Regulatory Assets Base (RAB) –
tangible and intangible assets used for the regulated activity, that are
directly related to the regulated activity and are used in tariff
calculation(except third-party-funded assets); bb) Building block approach –
defining the Regulatory Cost Base by the determination of its components; cc)
Base year - first test year for the tariff regulation period; dd) Consumer Price
Index (CPI) – average annual inflation rate published by the National Statistics
Office of Georgia; ee) Operational Expenses – expenses related to the operation
and maintenance of the electricity distribution grid  ff) Tariff application –
application form approved by the Commission, which includes financial and
technical data for the test year of  utility as well as investment plan for the
regulatory periods; gg) Tariff Regulatory period -time period set by GNERC ( to
years) for which tariffs are reviewed using correction factors foreseen in this
Methodology; hh) Tariff Year (+) - the calendar year for which the Commission
sets tariffs in accordance with this Methodology; ii) Test year (-)–the calendar
year prior to the tariff calculation year by the Commission; jj) Utility -
distribution licencee who are subject to tariff setting according to this
Methodology for electricity distribution, pass through and consumption; kk)
Tariff calculation year ()- the calendar year prior to the tariff year; ll)
Depreciation/Amortization – gradual allocation of depreciable amount of the
tangible/non-tangible asset over its useful life; mm) Net book value – asset
cost minus accumulated depreciation and accumulated revaluation loss Article
Main Principles  This Methodology and the tariffs set on its bases  protect
consumers from the monopolistic prices;  stimulate utility to increase its
efficiency via optimization of its costs with the requirement not to decrease
qualiy of service standards and technical conditions of the utility;  support
the increase of the utility’’ returns by means of increased operational and
management efficiency;  support the stable and realible functioning of the
utility;  ensure that tariffs are transparent, stable and fair for the utility;
reflect the state policy with regard to discount tariffs, provided that none of
the consumers categories shall receive  discount tariff subsidized by licensee,
importer, market operator or any other category;  reflect different costs
between the different consumer categories;  cover costs of the utility with
funds recieved from each consumer category in proportion to costs incurred for
servicing this consumer category  For the determination of the Regulatory Cost
Base structure of  utility, the Commission uses building block approach The
following components are used in this method:  Capital expenses;  Controllable
operational expenses;  Non-controllable operational expenses;  Costs for filling
normative losses in electricity distribution network  Calculation of capital and
non-controllable operational expenses is carried out by "cost-plus" method, with
annually cost audit   For calculation controllable operational costs "incentive
regulation" principle is used, which implies setting up incentives to optimize
utility’ costs Controllable operational costs audit is carried out before
regulatory period and costs changes are made during tariff regulatory period
accordingly to this methodology In case the result of the cost audit revealed
corrective information of the previous year() existed before test year, which
was not identified in the previous year() tariff calculations, Commission has
authority to use this information for correcting the results of the audit
Correction shall to be made by using principles outlined in Chapter IV of this
methodology   The amount of actual losses and the target parameter estimation
model is used to calculate filling of electricity normative losses in the
distribution grid  All tariffs set by the Commission are VAT exclusive Article
Tariff regulatory and tariff setting period  Based on this methodology tariff
regulation period is determined individually for specific utilities  Commission
sets tariff regulatory period for each year according to the terms and
conditions of this methodology  The Commission sets for the whole tariff
regulatory period the basic components of the Weighted AvarageC of Capital
(WACC) and fixed rate for the efficiency factor (-factor)  Tariffs are set
annually by the Commission during tariff regulatory period, and it is valid from
January  to December CHAPTER II CALCULATION OF THE REGULATORY COSTS Article
Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year Regulatory Cost Base for the tariff
year is calculated according to the following formula: RCB(+)= CAPEX(+)
+cOPEX(+)+ ncOPEX(+)+ CNL(+)+ CORR(+)() where, RCB(+) year(GEL); - Regulatory
Cost Base for the tariff CAPEX(+) -Capital Expenses for the tariff year (GEL);
cOPEX(+) - Controllable Operational Expenses for the tariff year (GEL);
ncOPEX(+) - Non-controllable Operational Expenses for the tariff year (GEL);
CNL(+) –Cost of Normative Losses in distribution networks for the tariff year
(GEL); Cost correction factor, which provides the reflection of the difference
between CORR(+)- factual and planned costs of Tariff Year in the Regulatory Cost
Base of the Tariff Year, and also received income from non-operational activity
envisaged in the subparagraph “” of paragraph  of Article 19 of this
Methodology, based on the principles defined in this Methodology (GEL)  Article6
Capital Expenses Capital Expenses for the Tariff Year are calculated according
to the following formula: CAPEX(+)= RAB(+)* WACC + (+) () where, CAPEX(+) -
Capital Expenses for the tariff year (GEL) RAB(+) -Regulated Assets Base for the
tariff year (GEL) WACC - Rate of returne on the RAB for the tariff regulatory
period (%); (+) - annual depreciation for the tariff year (GEL) Artilce
Regulatory Asset Base  In the formation of the Regulated Asset Base, current
utility assets and planned investment assets agreed with the Commission are
involved  For calculating the value of assest, the Commission uses Historic Cost
Valuation Method  In case the assets value can not be determined by the method
specified in paragrah  of this article, Commission has the autority to use
replacement cost asset valuation method In case the utility sells regulatory
assets to other utility, the Commission does not envisage asset re-sale value
while calculating relevant tariffs Investment cost is used to value planned
assets cost, which is agreed with the Commission (Construction, purchase,
repair, etc)    The value of RAB is determined by the Net Book Value of the
assets that constitute RAB   During the regulatory period the Commission
reflects in RAB annual planned investment for Tariff Calculation Year and Tariff
Year according to the investment plan of the utility The investment plan of
utility, as well as amendments in investment plan before tariff setting or
correction, should preliminary be agreed with the Commission The utility should
justify the necessity for the planned investment, as well as planned target
effect and the benefit The Commission shall approve and consequently reflect in
RAB only those investments, which it considers as justified and reasonable after
the appropriate review and assessment If planned investment by the utility
(specific investment project) was not carried out based on the investment plan
provisions agreed with GNERC (was not over till the end of the investment plan
year), such investments are considered as construction-in-progress and capital
expenses on these investments are subject to correction, in accordance with this
Methodology If the utility does not submit the investment plan and does not
agree the volume of investment with the Commission, the Commission is authorized
not to consider the factual uncoordinated investment while calculation of tariff
If the company cannot achieve the targets planned for the investment, including
quality of service standards set by the Commission, the Commission is authorized
to apply penalty mechanisms according to the current legislation If the company
reaches the targets, the Commission uses the incentive mechanisms The RAB shall
not reflect: ) Those investments that were carried or will be carried out by
third party financing; companies should account for such assets separately; )
Those investments which are not considered as justified and reasonable by the
Commission; ) ) ) Assets that are not used in regulated activity; construction
in progress; Goodwill, except for goodwill which were formed during
privatization of the state property The Commission will consider capitalized
cost of the paid loan according to the factual annual interest rate for the long
term loan taken to finance the construction during the construction process in
the cost of asset defined in subparagraph  of paragraph 11 of this article, but
the rate should not exceed the rate of debt (rd) defined in this Methodology For
regulatory purposes the Commission is authorized to consider asset impairment
while defining net book value of the asset In addition, the Commission is
authorized to reflect asset impairment loss in tariff in some cases Accounting
of impairment loss shall be done separately by the utility RAB value at the end
of the tariff year shall be determined based on the following formula:
RAB(+)=TA(-)+IA(-)-TP(-)– RA(-,,+)+pINV(,+)-pD(,+)-pTP(,+)+pDTP(,+) () Where,
RAB(+) - value of RAB at the end of the tariff year(GEL); TA(-) -value of
tangible assets at the end of the test year (GEL); IA(-) -value of intangible
assets at the end of the test year (GEL); TP(-)- value of assets, financed by
third party, at the end of the test year (GEL);  RA(-,,+) the Tariff Calculation
Year and Tariff Year, and value of the impairment loss during test year (GEL) -
Retired assets in the test year, assets value which will be retired within
investment plan in pINV(, +)- value of planned assets envisaged by invetsment
plan approved by the Commission for the calculation year and the Tariff Year
(GEL) pD(,+) tangible and intangible assets (GEL) -annual
depreciation/amortization for the tariff calculation year and tariff year
charged to pTP(,+)-assets cost financed by third party during tariff year and
tariff calculation year (GEL) pDTP(,+) -annual depreciation/amortization of the
assets, created by third party financing, during tariff calculation year and
tariff year (GEL) Artilcle  Depreciation/Amortization  The Commission shall
apply the Straight-line method of depreciation/amortization  For the assets
which were purchased or created after January , 2014,”Regulated Asset
depreciation/amortization Rates for Regulated Utilities” shall be used approved
by the commission  With regard to assets purchased or created before January ,
2014 GNERC is authorized to use depreciation/amortization rates defined in the
tax code Article  Weighted Average Cost of Capital  Rate of Return on RAB is
defined based on Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) method  Weighted
Average Cost of Capital (WACC) is fixed during the regulatory period  The pre
tax Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) for each regulatory period is
calculated as follows: (−)∗𝒓𝒆 (−) 𝐖𝐀𝐂𝐂 𝒑𝒓𝒆−𝒕𝒂𝒙 =  ∗ 𝒓𝒅 + () where,  WACC pre-tax
- pre tax Wighted Average Cost of Capital (%)  -share of loans(%) rd -cost of
debt (%) re -cost of own capital (%)  -profit tax (%)  Cost of debt and own
capital is calculated based on the following formula: rd = rrf + DP () re = rrf+
× (rm-rrf) () Where, rrf - risk free rate (%) DP - debt premium (%) rm - market
risk (%)  - relative sectorial risk factor  The share of loans () of the total
capital is 60 percent  Risk free rate (rrf), relative sectorial risk factor (),
market risk premium (rm-rrf), and the debt premium (DP) are fixed for each
tariff regulatory period The commission will determine the long-term risk-free
interest rate based on the annual income for the long-term international state
bonds before the expiration date, and the market risk premium and the debt
premium will be determined on the basis of expert opinion Article 10 Operational
Costs  For the purpose of this Methodology operational costs consist of two
components: – controllable and non- controllable expenses 10  Operational
expenses should ensure the recovery of costs associated with the regulated
activity, in particular:  ii service and maintenance costs administrative and
general expenses  Operational costs cover maintenance cost of fix assets
financed by third party, including current repair, service and maintenance as
well as other costs  Operational costs cover reimbursement of the short-term
loan interest borrowed for financing working capital, which should not exceed
average annual interest rate on the short term loans issued by commercial banks
to legal entities  For calculating operational costs for the Tariff Year,
operational costs for the Test Year, which are justified, reasonable and fair,
are considered In case the utility does not have factual data for test year, the
Commission is authorized to request from the utility technical and economic
forecasting data for the Tariff Year by the tariff application The Commission is
authorized to consider only the data which is justified, reasonable and fair
For tariff calculation for the Tariff Year the Commission uses audited factual
financial and technical data, that should be submitted according to the
Commission approved form and should be verified by the head of the company or
duly authorized person  Within its mandate the Commission is authorized to
verify the correctness of the submitted documentation, assess fairness and
reasonableness of the costs submitted For this purpose the Commission is
authorized to assess operational costs for the test year based on operational
cost analysis of the preceding year If in addition to the regulated activity as
defined by this Methodology, the utility carries out other non- regulated
activities, costs associated with that activity shall not be reflected in tariff
calculation  Article 11 Controllable Operational Expenses  Controllable
Operational Expenses include all costs over which the utility has the ability to
make  decision and therefore may affect them (salaries, on-going repair works,
outsourcing, office maintenance, insurance costs, security costs, business trip,
etc) The base of Controllable Operational Expenses of the utility shall be
audited Controllable Operational Expenses of the Base Year; audited Controllable
Operational Expenses for every Tariff Year of Tariff Regulatory period is
changing according to the Consumer Price Index and Efficiency Factor and it is
calculated by following formula: ii cOPEX (+) = cOPEX(–)* ( + CPIt – Xt) * ( +
CPI(+) – (+)) () 11 where: cOPEX (+) - Controllable Operational Expenses for the
tariff year (GEL); cOPEX(–)- Controllable Operational Expenses for the test year
(GEL); CPIt- average annual rate of inflation, during tariff calculating year,
which is calculated in accordance with paragraph  of this Article (%); ()-
efficiency factor during tariff calculation year (%); CPI(+)- average annual
rate of inflation, during tariff year, which is calculated in accordance with
paragraph  of this Article, (%); (+) - efficiency factor during tariff year (%)
iii For the inflation (CPIt) rate of the Tariff Calculation Year ()  percentage
change of annual average value of year (-) compared to annual average value of
year (-) is taken For the inflation rate (CPIt+) of the Tariff Year (+)
percentage change of annual average value of year (- ) compared to annual
average value of year (-) is taken iv Article 12 Non-controllable Operational
Expenses  Non- controllable Operational Expenses include all costs which are
triggered by outside factors and utility cannot affect them This includes taxes,
fees, regulation fee, market operator tariff etc 12  For the tariff year, the
non-controllable operational expenses from the test year is changed by the
Consumer Price Index and is calculated as follows: ncOPEX (+) = ncOPEX(–)* ( +
CPIt) * ( + CPI(+)) () where: ncOPEX (+) – Non-controllable Operational Expenses
for the tariff year (GEL); ncOPEX(–)- Non- controllable Operational Expenses for
the test year (GEL); CPIt- average annual rate of inflation during tariff
calculating year, which is calculated in accordance with the paragraph  of
Article (%); CPI(+)- average annual rate of inflation during tariff year, which
is calculated in accordance with the paragraph  of Article (%) Article13
Electricity Normative Loss  The electricity normative loss rate is set by
according to the rule envisaged in the relevant normative act and is effective
during the regulatory period  The electricity normative loss rate set by the
Commission is fixed during regulatory period, except in cases specified by law
13  New rates of the electricity normative losses are set before the start
period of each regulatory period  The commission sets normative loss rate with
its separate resolution  The cost of normative loss shall be reflected in tariff
only in those cases where this service includes such cost by law  If factual
loss rate in distribution grid exceeds the approved rate, the difference shall
not be reflected in tariff calculation and will not be reimbursed  If factual
loss rate is less than approved normative rate, the utility shall keep the
profit from the difference  When distribution grid services envisage the
obligation for filling the normative losses, the cost of energy to compensate
for the normative loss is calculated based on the following formula: ()
CNL(+)=Pave( +)* Eloss(+) / 100 Where, CNL(+ ) – normative loss value for the
ditrubution grid for the tariff year (GEL) Pave(+) – average weighted cost of
energy to be purchased to compensate the normative losses for the tariff year
(tetri/kWh), Eloss (+) – volume of normative losses for the tariff year (kWh)
Weighted average cost of energy to be purchased for the tariff year by
distribution licensee to recover electricity normative losses includes costs
related to the electricity purchase cost and is calculated in accordance with
paragraph  of the Article The amount of electricity normative losses in the
tariff year is defined considering forecasted amount of distributed and passed
through electricity in accordance with the paragraph  of Article Article 14 Cost
Distribution (Allocation) 14  If the utility carries out more than one regulated
activity as well as non-regulated activity, it is obligated to present unbundled
data about costs and revenues for each regulated activity to the Commission for
the Test Year according to the Commission approved reporting forms  The
Commission sets distribution, pass through and consumption tariffs according to
the voltage levels of the distribution grids of the company  The Company is
obligated to allocate direct cost of the test year to the corresponding voltage
levels Non- direct costs should be also allocated for each voltage level and
utility has to prove the reasonability of the allocation method  The Commission
is authorized to disagree with the non-direct cost allocation method
(considering it unjust and unreasonable) and use another method of cost
allocation  For calculating the relevant tariff according to voltage levels, the
Commission carries out cost allocation between voltage levels based on Cost
Cascading Method (Annex #) CHAPTER III TARIFF CALCULATION DISTRIBUTION, PASS
THROUGH AND CONSUMPTION TARIFF CALCULATION Article 15 Electricity Distribution
and Pass through Tariffs  For the distribution licensee distribution and pass
through tariffs are set for distribution and pass through activities
Electricity Distribution and Pass through Tariffs are set according to the
following voltage levels:  on ,-, kV;  on ,--10 kV;  on  kV  Electricity
distribution tariffs for each voltage level are calculated according to the
following formula: 𝑹𝑪𝑩i (+) 𝑬i Distrib(+) Ti Distrib = * 100 (10) 15 where, Ti
Distrib_ distribution tariff for -voltage level (tetri/kWh) RCB (+ ) - Regulated
Cost Base of the entity for the tariff year of the tariff regulatory period,
allocated to -voltage level according to this Methodology(GEL) Ei Distrib(+) –
Sum of forecasted amounts of electricity distributed and passed through the
distribution network for the tariff year according to the each -voltage level
(kWh)  – Corresponding voltage level of the electricity distribution network
Pass through tariff equals to the distribution tariff Article 16 Electricity
Consumption Tariff  Electricity consumtion tariff includes costs related to the
electricity purchase and distribution  Electricity consumtion tariff is set for
each voltage level of the distribution network; it is based on principles of
this Methodology and this article and is calculated according to the following
formula: Ti Consum(+)= Pave(+)+ Ti Distrib (+)(11) where, Ti Consum(+)
-Electricity consumtion tariff for -voltage level of the distribution network
for the tariff year (tetri/kWh) Ti distrib- electricity distribution tariff for
-voltage level of the distribution network for the tariff year (tetri/kWh)
Pave(+) – forecasted weighted average price of the electricity to be purchased
in the tariff year by distribution licensee, which includes all costs of
purchasing according to the legislation (tetri/kWh) 16  - Corresponding voltage
level of the electricity distribution network Article 17 Amount of Electricity
and Weighted Average Price  While calculating the tariffs the Commission
utilizes the actual amounts of purchased and distributed electricity during the
test year, considering the consumption dynamics in the sector and/or the
Electricity (Capacity) forecasted balance approved for Tariff Year during tariff
calculation year  The utility is obliged to submit the possible amount and price
of the electricity to be purchased from particular sources according to the
paragraph  of this article, for the purpose of determining weighted average
price of the electricity to be purchased in the tariff year by distribution
licensee; also other forecasted costs related to electricity purchase, such as
transmission, dispatch service and purchasing the guaranteed capacity Based on
submitted information the Commission sets Weighted Average Price for Purchased
Electricity by the utility  Based on submitted information the Commission sets
Weighted Average Price for Purchased Electricity by the utility for tariff year
according to the following formula: 𝑪𝑶𝑺𝑻𝑬(+)+𝑪𝑶𝑺𝑻𝑮𝑪(+)+𝑪𝑶𝑺𝑻𝑻(+)+𝑪𝑶𝑺𝑻𝑫(+)+𝑪𝑶𝑹𝑹
𝑬𝒍(+)  𝐑𝐞𝐜𝐞𝐢𝐯(+) Paver(+)= *100 (12) Where,  aver(+) - Weighted Average Price
for electricity to be purchased for tariff year by the utility (tetri/kWh)
COSTE(+) – Total forecasted cost of electricity to be purchased by the utility
for the tariff year (GEL) COSTGC(+) - Total forecasted cost of guaranteed
capacity fee for tariff year (GEL) COSTT(+) – Total forecasted cost of
transmission service provided by transmission licensees (GEL) COSTD(+) – Total
forecasted cost of dispatch service provided by dispatch licensee (GEL) CORR
El(+)– Electricity Purchase Correction Factor, which ensures the reflection of
the difference between planned and actual costs related to the Electricity
purchase for Tariff Year;  Receiv(+) – Forecasted amount of electricity received
(metered) on the delivery points of the utility for the tariff year (kWh) 17
CHAPTER IV TARIFF CORRECTION Article 18 Tariff Correction Principles and Main
Mechanisms  This methodology envisages reflection of the planned figures (RAB,
investments, amounts of the electricity purchased and distributed (passed
through), etc) in the RCB Accordingly, the Commission is authorized to make
tariff correction for each year of the tariff regulatory period based on the
Cost Correction Factor  Electricity Consumption Tariff is adjusted based on the
correction of the Electricity Distribution Tariff or Weighted Average Price for
Electricity Article 19 Correction of Distribution Tariff  Electricity
Distribution Tariff for every tariff year is subject to correction and it is
based on the following factors:   distributed and passed through electricity
volume;  cost of electricity normative losses;  quality of service;  non-
operating income factual investment;  Cost correction factor is calculated
according to the following formula: CORR (+) = cRRAB(+) + cD(+) - cRev(+) +
cCNL(+) - nopREV(+)(13), Where: CORR (+)– Cost correction factor for tariff year
(GEL) –Difference between factual and planned return on RAB for test year (-),
reflected in tariff year cRRAB(+) (+) (GEL); cD(+) – Difference between factual
and planed values of depreciation for test year (-), reflected in tariff year
(+) (GEL); 18 cRev(+) – Difference between the returns on factual distributed
and planned to distribute electricity for the test year -), reflected in tariff
year (+) (GEL); cCNL(+)- Difference between factual and planed values of
normative losses for the test year -), reflected in tariff year (+) (GEL);
nopREV(+) – profit from the selling of retired assets and from non-regulated
activities using assets from RAB, positive difference between the utility’
income from the connection of the new customers to the distribution network and
the costs related to them, also received funds for financing the operating costs
from the third party for the test year (-) (GEL) Article 20 Correction of
Capital Costs  If factual investment made by the utility during the tariff
regulatory period differs from the amount of planned investment, then the tariff
correction is carried out according to the factual investment, taking into
consideration the principles described in the Article  of this methodology
Correction of Capital Costs for the difference received from the investment
amount is calculated according to the following formula: cRRAB(+) = [(aRAB(–) –
pRAB(–)) × WACC (–)] × ( + WACC (–)) × ( + WACC )(14), Where: cRRAB(+) –
Corrected cost or the return for (+) period (GEL); aRAB(–) – Factual cost of RAB
for (-) period (GEL); pRAB(–) – Planned cost of RAB for (-) period (GEL); WACC –
Rate of time value of money, which is equal to WACC (%) cD(+) = (aD(–) – pD(–))
× ( + WACC(–)) × ( + WACC ) (15), 19 cD(+) – Corrected cost of Annual
depreciation for (+) period (GEL); aD(–) - Factual cost of Annual depreciation
for (-) period (GEL); pD(–) - Planned cost of Annual depreciation for (-) period
(GEL); WACC - Rate of time value of money, which is equal to WACC (%) Article 21
Correction of the Revenues from Electricity Distribution and Pass through  If
factual distributed and passed through electricity of utility differs from the
planned amounts during tariff regulation period for each year, then correction
of RCB of utility is calculated according to the following formula: cREV(+) =
[(aE(–) – pE(–)) × (–) ] × ( + WACC (–)) × ( + WACC ) (16), Where: cREV(+) –
Corrected cost of Revenue for (+) period (GEL); aE(–) – Factual amount of
distributed and passed through electricity for (-) period (GEL); pE(–)– Planned
amount of distributed and passed through electricity for (-) period (GEL); (–)–
Tariff for (-) period (GEL); WACC – Rate of time value of money, which is equal
to WACC (%) 20  If the difference between the factual distributed and passed
through electricity and planned amount is caused by the reason of the utility,
the Commission will not use correction mechanism defined in the Paragraph  of
this Article Article 22 Correction of the Cost of Normative losses  If factual
distributed and passed through electricity of utility differs from the planned
amounts during tariff regulation period for each year, the Commission provides
determination of the losses for factual distributed and passed through
electricity and makes corrections of the Cost of Normative losses according to
the following formula: cCNL(+)=[(aELoss(-) × aPave(–) –pELoss(-) ×pPave(–))] × (
+ WACC (–))×(+WACC ) (17), cCNL(+)–Corrected cost of Electricity Normative
Losses for (+) period (GEL); aELoss(-)– Corrected amount of Electricity
Normative Losses, which is calculated according to the Paragraph  of this
article (kWh); pELoss(-)– Planned amount Electricity Normative Losses for (-)
period (kWh); aPave(–)– Factual weighted average price of purchasing electricity
for (-) period (GEL); pPave(–)–Planned weighted average price of purchasing
electricity for (-) period (GEL); WACC –Rate of time value of money, which is
equal to WACC (%)  Corrected amount of Electricity Normative Losses for the test
year is calculated according to the following formula: 21 aELoss(-) = aE(-)/(-)
- aE(-) (18), Where: aELoss(-) – Corrected amount of Electricity Normative
Losses for (-) period (kWh); aE(-) – Factual amount of distributed and passed
through electricity for the (-) period (kWh);  –Rate of Normative Losses set by
the Commission for the regulatory period (%) Article 23 Correction of Weighted
Average Price of Electricity  If during the regulatory period factual weighted
average price of purchased electricity differs from the planned price, the
Commission is authorized to make correction of Weighted Average Price of
Electricity for each year of the tariff regulation period using the principle of
the time value of money envisaged in this Methodology  The Correction of
Weighted Average Price of Electricity is based on the following factors:  amount
and cost of purchased electricity  cost of purchased guaranteed capacity,
transmission and dispatch service  The Correction of Weighted Average Price of
Electricity is made in case the change between factual and planned data is not
due to the utility CHAPTER  TARIFF SETTING AND APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES
Article 24 Accounting and Reporting  For regulatory purposes the utility is
obligated to carry out its accounting and reporting based on the Unified System
of Accounts (USOA) according to the current legislation  If utility carries out
more than one regulated activity as well as non–regulated activity, it is
obligated to account its revenues, costs and financial results separately for
each regulated activity 22  The utility should submit information about fixed
assets created from customer financial sources separately according to the
conditions of this Methodology Article 25 Required Documents for Tariff
Calculation  The utility has to submit tariff application to the Commission for
the purpose of tariff setting for the tariff calculation period  Tariff
application and data templates, also the list of documentation to be filled with
tariff application is determined according to the individual legal-
administrative act of the Commission  Together with tariff application the
utility must submit the following audited documentation complied with IFRS: )
balance sheet ) Profit and Loss Statement ) Cash Flow Statement  The Commission
is authorized to request from the utility other additional information which it
finds appropriate  The responsibility on the accuracy of the information
contained in the tariff application lies on the party submitting the application
Article 26 Tariff Setting Timeline and Procedures  The utility should submit
tariff application to the Commission no later than 150 days prior to expiry date
of the tariff period  The Commission reviews the tariff application for
compliance and completeness within three days upon submission If the Commission
finds tariff application incomplete or it does not correspond with the approved
form, it sets the deadline in written form of no more than 45 days for amending
this This period shall be extended only once at the request of the applicant,
for no more than 15 days If the tariff application is not submitted in time
defined in paragraph  of this Article, it remains unconsidered according to the
decision of the Commission If unconsidered tariff application was submitted due
to   23 legislation (due to expiration of regulatory period), sanctions shall be
imposed on the company in accordance with the law  The Commission is authorized
to make  relevant decision and review the utility’ tariffs on its own initiative
In this case the provisions of submitting necessary information and
documentations are determined by the decisions by the Commission  Upon
acceptance of properly submitted application and in case of paragraph  of this
Article, the Commission starts public administrative proceedings and the notice
shall be published on the Commission web site  Tariff application is reviewed
according to public administrative proceeding rule under Georgian legislation
Therefore, tariff application and enclosed documents (except for Personal
information relating to identifiable entities, as well as commercially
confidential information considered by the Commission) are public and shall be
available to any interested party  All the interested parties are authorized to
get familiar with materials presented to the Commission and provide their
comments  Comments on the tariff application shall be submitted in written form
and shall include justified argumentations In addition, the interested party is
entitled not to indicate his identity while submitting own comments The copy of
the comments shall be sent to the provider of the tariff application and
comments shall be discussed on the public hearing of tariff application The
Commission is authorized to request additional information or different types of
conclusions from the utility while reviewing tariff application In the process
of reviewing the tariff application before reaching the final decision, the
Commission is authorized to organize meetings and/or public hearings for the
review of the tariff application Applicant shall be notified about the time and
venue of the public hearing seven days in advance 24 CHAPETR VI TRANSITIONAL
PROVISIONS Article 20 Transitional Provisions  For the first regulatory period
the components of the WACC is determined as follows:  Risk-free rate (rrf)  Debt
Premium  market risk premium (rm- rrf)  sectorial risk coefficient () – 50%;
(DP) -50%; - 25%; -00  For the first Regulatory period (from January , 2015)
general efficiency factor (Xgen) equals to the %, and individual efficiency
factor (Xind) is equals to   For that utility whose tariff is set till August
31, 2014, the first regulatory period is applied from the September , 2014 till
December 31, Correction principles and mechanisms defined in this Methodology
will be applied only for the regulatory period from January , 2015 till December
31,  Corrections defined in the Chapter IV of this methodology will be carried
out from the second calendar year of the first regulatory period annually
(expect of the corrections defined in the sub-paragraph ) of Paragraph  of
Article 19)  Tariff correction by service quality factor shall be carried out
after appropriate rule will enter into the force by the Commission Annex N1 Cost
Cascading Method Cost Cascading (allocation) mechanism of allocating different
voltage levels to the consumers (2nd stage of cost allocation), according to the
energy consumption by voltage levels: 25 G1 – Energy supply from Generation to
the first level G2 – Energy supply from Generation to the second level G3 –
Energy supply from Generation to the third level; L1 – Total losses on the first
level; L2 – Total losses on the second level; L3 – Total losses on the third
level; C11 – Delivered energy to the first level consumers (consumption on the
first level); C12 – Energy supply from first level to the second level; C1 = C11
+ C12, Total delivered energy from the first level (G1 - L1); C22 – Delivered
energy to the second level consumers (consumption on the second level); C23 -
Delivered energy to the second level from the third level; C2= C22+ C23, Total
delivered energy from the second level (G2 + C12 - L2); C33 - Delivered energy
to the third level consumers (consumption on the third level); S11 = C11/ C1 -
Energy share consumed by first level consumers in the total delivered energy
from this level S22 = C22/ C2 - Energy share consumed by second level consumers
in the total delivered energy from this level S33 = C33/ C3 - Energy share
consumed by third level consumers in the total delivered energy from this level
26 Cost Cascading (allocation) mechanism is based on energy consumptions on
separate voltage levels S1 = S11 × Cost1 , Allocated share of loss value (and
other costs) to the first level consumers is defined as first level cost (Cost1)
to be allocated to the same level consumers, so S11 factor is multiplied by
first level cost S2 = S22 × Cost2 + S22 × (( - S11) × Cost1), Allocated share of
loss value (and other costs) to the second level consumers consists of two
components The first one defines the share of the second level cost (Cost2) to
be attributed to the same level consumers, so S22 factor is multiplied by the
cost allocated to the second level And the second component determines the share
of the first level cost (Cost2) to be attributed to the second level consumers
For this purpose, the residual share of the first level cost (not attributed to
the first level consumers) is taken, from which the part is attributed to the
second level that corresponds to the consumed energy share by the second level
consumers in the total delivered energy from the same level S3 = S33 × Cost3 +
S33 × (( - S22) × Cost2) + S33 × (( - S22) × ( - S11) × Cost1), Allocated share
of loss value (and other costs) to the third level consumers consists of three
components The first one defines the share of the third level cost (Cost3) to be
attributed to the same level consumers, so S33 factor (that equals to 100%) is
multiplied by the cost allocated to the third level And the second component
determines the share of the second level cost (Cost2) to be attributed to the
third level consumers and is residual share of second level cost (not attributed
to the second level consumers), that is totally attributed to the third level
(as S33 = 100%) And the second component determines the share of the first level
cost (Cost1) to be attributed to the third level consumers For this purpose, the
residual share of the first level cost (not attributed to the first level
consumers) is taken, from which the part is attributed to the third level
consumer which was not attributed to the second level consumers In order to
identify total energy delivered from each voltage level (C1, C2 and C3) it is
necessary to know the amount of total loss according to voltage levels (L1, L2
and L3) In case when information about losses is total and its allocation by
voltage levels is not available, then the regulator shall allocate the losses to
voltage levels with maximum possible approximation based on available data 27
Annex N2 Tariff Setting Methodology for Electricity Generation, Transmission,
Dispatch and Electricity Market Operator Service CHAPTER  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article  Purpose  Purpose of the Tariff Setting Methodology (thereafter “the
Methodology”) for Electricity Generation, Transmission, Dispatch and Electricity
Market Operator service is to define rules and principles for calculating tariff
for Electricity Generation, Transmission, Dispatch and Electricity Market
Operator service in accordance with the Law of Georgia on Electricty and Natula
Gas  Based on this Methodology annual Tariff setting is in accordance with the
“Cost Plus” regulation principle which stimulates stable functioning of the
utility, recovery of reasonable costs and gain fair profit Article  Definitions
The terms used in methodlogy have the same meanining as in the Law of Georgia on
Electricity and Natural Gas  Other terms used in methodology for the tariff
regulation purposes have the following meaning: ) Intangible assets –
identifiable, non-monetary assets without physical form including patent, trade
mark, goodwilll, software, licence and other types of nonmaterial assets; )
Assets – tangible and intangible assets; ) Asset replacement costs - total
amount of costs, which is needed to create the similar asset of the evaluated
asset ) Asset cost – the real value of payments in money or money equivalents or
other compensation during the creation or the first purchase of an asset; )
Historic cost asset valuation method – Asset cost evaluation using the price of
its creation or the first purchase ) Electricity generation tariff of guaranteed
capacity source– Electricity price produced by guaranteed capacity source, in
which costs related to electricity production are reflected except for the costs
reflected in the guaranteed capacity costs; ) Guaranteed capacity cost – set
tariff for providing state’ Unified Electricity System with guaranteed capacity
by guaranteed capacity source, which provides the 28 reimbursement of fixed
operating costs and capital costs of the guaranteed capacity source; )
Reasonable costs – cost incurred in accordance with the minimum cost principles,
which is rational and nessesary for the effective functioning of the utility )
Cost audit – regulations mechanisms, by means of which the commission or/and
neutral third party set reasonable costs incurred by the utility and define
regulatory asset base; ) Cost cascading method –allocation of the costs of the
upper volage levels of the distribution grid to the costs of the next voltage
levels; ) Electricity market operator service tariff –the price of incurred
service by the electricity market operator for qualified enterprises in
accordance with the current legislation; ) Electricity transmission tariff–
price of the transmission service provided by the transmission licensee via the
transmission grid for transmitting electricity to the consumer; ) Electricity
dispatch tariff – the price of dispatching service provided by the dispatch
licensee; ) Electricity Generation tariff –price of electricity produced by the
Generation licensee in which operating and capital costs are reflected related
to electricity production by the generation licensee; ) Investment –capital
investment which is used for creating or rehabilitation of assets the useful
life of which is more than one year; ) Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) –
rate of return on Regulatory Assets Base, calculated before taxes, according to
the capital structure of the company set by commission (own and attracted
capital); ) Capital Costs (CAPEX) - return on Regulatory Asset base and
depreciation/amortization, for the purpose of this Methodology ) Tangible assets
– major assets used by the company for the regulated activity, including land,
buildings, machinery, equipment and other main assets which useful life is more
than one year; ) Third party- any individual or legal person (including  State,
customer, etc), which provides subsidyto the utility, gives grant, pays fees for
the connection to the electricity transmission network and/or gives tangible and
intagible assets to the utility for free ) Regulated activity – for the purpose
of this Methodology activities of the electricity generation, transmission,
dispatching, electricity market operator service, providing guaranteed capacity
by the guaranteed capacity source and electricity generation regulated by the
Commission in accordance with the Law of Georgia on Electricity and Natural Gas;
) Regulatory Cost base (RCB) – Allowed income for the utility set by the
Commission for the Tariff Year, which is necessary for the effective functioning
of the utility and includes reasonable costs and rational profit; ) Regulatory
Assest Base (RAB) – tangible and intangible assets used for the regulated
activity, that are directly related to the regulated activity and are used in
tariff calculation(except for the assets created by the third party); ) Building
block approach – defining the Regulatory Cost Base by the determination of its
components 29 ) Tariff Year (+) - the calendar year for which the Commission
sets tariffs in accordance with this Methodology; ) Operational costs –Operating
and other costs related to the production, transmission and dispatching
licensees and electricity market operator activity; aa) Test year (-)–the
calendar year prior to the tariff calculation year by the Commission; bb) Tariff
application – application form designed and approved by the commission, which
includes financial and technical data for the Test Year of  company as well as
investments made during the Test Year; cc) Utility – production, transmission
and dispatching licencees, also electricity market operator who are subject to
tariff setting according to this Methodology in accordance with the current
legislation for their regulated activities; dd) Tariff calculation year ()-the
calendar year prior to the Tariff Year; ee) Fixed operational costs – the
operational costs of guaranteed capacity source which does not depend on
electricity production by the guaranteed capacity source; ff)
Depreciation/amortization – systematic allocation of depreciable amount of the
tangible/intangible asset over its useful life; gg) Variable operational costs –
the operational costs of guaranteed capacity source which depends on the
electricity production by the guaranteed capacity source or the volume of
produced electricity (including fuel cost, chemical reagents, etc); hh) Net book
value - asset cost minus accumulated depreciation Article  Main Principles  This
Methodology and the tariffs set on its bases protect consumers from the
monopolistic prices; support the stable and realible functioning of the company;
ensure that tariffs are transparent, stable and fair for the companies; reflect
different service costs between the customer categories; cover costs of the
company with funds recieved from each customer category in ) ) ) ) ) proportion
to costs incurres for servicing this customer category  For determination of RCB
structure "building blocks" approach method is used RCB defined by this
methodology consists with the following components: ) Capital expenses; )
Operation expenses  Calculation of Capital and Operation expenses is carried out
by "cost-plus" method, with annual cost audit  In case if result of the cost
audit revealed corrective information of the previous years existed before test
year, which was not identified in the previous year() tariff calculations,
Commission has authority to use this information for correcting the results of
the audit Correction shall to be made by using principles outlined in Chapter IV
of this methodology  All tariffs set by the Commission are calculated without
Value Added Tax (VAT) 30 Article  Tariff Setting Period  Accoridng to this
Methodology tariffs are set from January ,  GNERC is authorized to set tariffs
annually for specific utilities on an individual bases and is valid from
January1 till December31 CHAPTER II REGULATORY COST BASE Article  Regulatory
Cost Base for the Tariff Year Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year is
calculated according to the following formula: RCB(+)= CAPEX(+) +OPEX(+)+
CORR(+) () Where, RCB(+) - RCB for the Tariff Year(GEL); CAPEX(+)-Capital Costs
for the Tariff Year(GEL); OPEX(+)- Operating Costs for the Tariff Year(GEL);
CORR(+) - Cost correction factor, which provides the reflection of the
difference between actual and planned costs in the cost base of the Tariff Year,
and also received income from non-operational activity envisaged in the
subparagraph “” of paragraph  of Article 19 of this Methodology, based on the
principles defined in this Methodology (GEL) Article  Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures for the Tariff Year are calculated according to the
following formula: CAPEX(+)= RABstart(+)* WACC + (+) () 31 where, CAPEX(+)-
Capital Costs for the Tariff Year(GEL) RABstart(+-RAB for the beginning of
Tariff Year(GEL) WACC - Rate of return on the RAB for the tariff (%); (+) -
annual depreciation for the Tariff Year(GEL) Artilce  Regulatory Asset Base For
calculating the value of Regulated Assest Base, GNERC uses Historic Cost
Valuation Method In case if the assets value can not be determined by the mothod
specified in paragrah  of this article, Commission has the autority to use
replacement cost asset valuation method In case if the utility sells regulatory
assets to other utility, GNERC does not envisage asset re-sale value while
calculating relevant tariffs The RAB includes the existing asset value including
actually made investments The RAB shall not reflect: ) Those investments that
were carried out by third party financing, companies should account for such
assets separately; ) Those investments the company does not consider justified
and reasonable; ) Assets that are not used in regulated activity; ) construction
in progress ) Goodwill, except goodwill which were formed during privatization
of the state property The Commission will consider capitalized cost of the paid
loan according to the factual annual interest rate for the long term loan taken
to finance the construction during the construction process in the cost of asset
defined in subparagraph  of paragraph  of this article, but the rate should not
exceed the rate of debt (rd) defined in this methodology Value of regulated
assets base of utility is determined on the basis of the net book value engaged
in this base 32 For regulatory purposes GNERC is authorized to consider asset
impairment while defining net book value of the asset Thereby, the Commission is
authorized to reflect asset impairment loss in tariff in some cases Accounting
of impairment loss shall be done separately by the utility RAB value at the
beginning of the Tariff Year shall be determined based on the following formula:
RAB start(+) = RAB end(-) + INVt- Dt () where, RABstart(+) - value of RAB at the
beginning of the Tariff Year(+) (GEL); RABend(-) - value of RAB at the end of
the Test Year (-) (GEL); INVt- actually made investments approved by GNERC for
the Tariff Calculation Year() (GEL); Dt -depreciation for the Tariff Calculation
Year Artilcle  Depreciation and Amortization  GNERC applies the straight line
method for determining the depreciation/amortization rates  For the assets which
were purchased or created after January , 2014,”Regulated Asset
depreciation/amortization Rates for Regulated Utilities” shall be used approved
by the commission  With regard to assets purchased or created before January ,
2014 GNERC is authorized to use depreciation/amortization rates defined in the
tax code Article  Weighted Average Cost of Capital  Rate of Return on RAB is
defined based on Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) method  The pre tax
Weighted Avarege Cost of Capital (WACC) for the Tariff Year is calculated as
follows: (−)∗𝒓𝒆 (−) () 𝑾𝑨𝑪𝑪𝒑𝒓𝒆−𝒕𝒂𝒙 =  ∗ 𝒓𝒅 + 33 where, WACC pre-tax - pre tax
Wighted Average Cost of Capital (%) - share of attracted capital (%) rd- cost of
borrowed capital (%) re- cost of own capital (%) - profit tax (%)  Cost of
attracted capital and own capital is calculated based on the following formula:
rd = rrf + DP () re = rrf+  × (rm-rrf) () where, rrf- risk free rate (%) DP-
debt premium (%) rm- market risk (%) - sectoral risk factor  The share of loans
() of the total capital is 60 percent  The commission will determine the long-
term risk-free interest rate based on the annual income for the long-term
international state bonds before the expiration date, and the market risk
premium and the debt premium will be determined on the basis of expert opinion
Article 10 Operational costs  Test Year data is used for calculation of
operational costs for the Tariff Year  For calculating operational costs for the
Tariff Year operational costs for the Test Year which are justified, reasonable
and fair is considered  In case the utility does not have factual data for test
year, the Commission is authorized to request from the utility technical and
economic forecasting data for the Tariff Year by the tariff application The
Commission is authorized to consider only the data which is justified,
reasonable and fair  Operational costs should ensure the recovery of costs
associated with the regulated activity, in particular: 34 ) service and
maintenance expenses; ) administrative and general expenses  Operational costs
covers maintenance cost of fix assets financed by third party, including current
repair, service and maintenance as well as other costs  Operational costs covers
reimbursement of the short-term loan interest that was borrowed for financing
the working capital, which should not exceed average annual interest rate on the
short term loans issued by commercial banks to legal entities  For tariff
calculation for the Tariff Year the Commission uses audited factual financial
and technical data, including factual data for specific fuel cost, which should
be submitted according to the Commission approved forms and the validity and
accuracy of which should be verified by the head of the company or duly
authorized person  Within its mandate the Commission is authorized to verify the
correctness of the submitted documentation, assess fairness and reasonableness
of the costs submitted For this purpose the Commission is authorized to assess
operational costs for the test year based on operational cost analysis of the
preceding year  If in addition to the regulated activity as defined by this
Methodology, the utility carries out other non-regulated activities, costs
associated with that activity shall not be reflected in tariff calculation
Article 11 Electricity normative loses Cost of electricity normative loses in
electricity transmission tariffs are envisaged in case if the service provided
by the utility envisages such cost according to current legislation 35 Article
12 Cost Distribution (Allocation)  If the utility carries out more than one
regulated activity as well as non-regulated activity, it is obligated to present
to the Commission unbundled data about costs and revenues for each regulated
activity for the Test Year according to the Commission approved reporting forms
The Commission sets transmission tariffs according to the voltage levels of the
transmission grids of the utility  Transmission licensee is obliged to allocate
direct cost of the test year to the corresponding voltage levels Non-direct
costs should be also allocated to each voltage level and the licensee has to
justify the reasonability and fairness of the allocation method  The Commission
is authorized to disagree with the non-direct cost allocation method
(considering it unjust and unreasonable) and use another method of cost
allocation For calculating the relevant tariff according to voltage levels, the
Commission carries out cost allocation between voltage levels based on Cost
Cascading Method (Annex #) 36 Chapter III Tariff Calculation Article 13 Amount
of Electricity For calculating tariffs the Commission utilizes forecast balance
of approved electricity (capacity) or factual data of the Test Year Article 14
Electricity Generation Tariff For calculating generation tariff of power plant
for the Tariff Year RCB is divided by the electricity amount delivered at the
bus-bar and is calculated according to the following formula: 𝑹𝑪𝑩(+)  𝑫𝒆𝒍𝒊𝒗𝒆𝒓𝒆𝒅
(+) Tgeneration (+)=  100 () Where, Tgeneration (+) - Tariff for the electricity
delivered at the power plant bus-bar for the Tariff Year (+) (tetri/kWh)
Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year (+) (GEL); Electricity amount delivered
at the power plant bus-bar for the Tariff Year (+) (kWh) RCB(+) – EDelivered(+)
– Article 15 Guaranteed capacity cost and electricity generation tariff of
guaranteed capacity source  For the guaranteed capacity source (generation
licensee) two-step tariff is set which includes guaranteed capacity cost and
electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity source  Guaranteed capacity
cost and electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity source is
calculated based on the same principles and includes the same components as
electricity generation tariff under the provisions in this article  Guaranteed
capacity cost provides the recovery of those fixed operational costs and capital
expenses which are not directly related to electricity generation  Guaranteed
capacity cost is determined for each guaranteed capacity source on  daily basis
Guaranteed capacity cost is calculated based on the following formula: 37 𝑶𝑷𝑬𝑿
𝒇𝒊𝒙(+)+𝑪𝑨𝑷𝑬𝑿(+) (+)  (+)= () where,  (+) - Guaranteed capacity cost for the
Tariff Year (+) (GEL/day); OPEX fix (+) - Fixed operational expenses of the
utility for the Tariff Year (+) (GEL); CAPEX (+) – Capital expenses for the
Tariff Year (+) (GEL); (+) - Planned number of standby days of guaranteed
capacity source for the Tariff Year (+)  The number of standby days of
guaranteed capacity source does not include the period (days) of planned repair
and non-operating days which are planned by the utility and agreed with the
dispatch licensee  Electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity source
reflects the costs directly related to electricity generation (including fuel
cost, chemical reagents, and other costs defined by the legislation)
Electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity source is calculated
according to the following formula: 𝑶𝑷𝑬𝑿 𝒗𝒂𝒓(+)+𝒄𝑬𝑿𝑪(+)+𝒄𝑬𝑭𝑭(+)  𝒅𝒆𝒍𝒊𝒗𝒆𝒓𝒆𝒅 (+)
Tvar(+)= X100 () Where, Tvar(+) - Electricity generation tariff of guaranteed
capacity source (tetri/kWh); OPEXvar(+) – Tariff Year (+) (GEL); Variable
Operational Expenses of the guaranteed capacity source for the Profit or loss
resulted by the difference between planned and actual amounts cEXC(+) - of
foreign currency exchange rate versus GEL at the moment of purchasing fuel (gas,
masut, coal) for electricity generation by TPP and fuel purchasing price, which
is calculated according to the rule described in paragraph  (GEL); cEFF(+) -
Profit or loss resulted by the difference between planned and actual amounts of
specific cost of fuel (gas, masut, coal) for electricity generation by TPP,
which is calculated according to the rule described in paragraph 10 (GEL);
EDelivered(+) - Electricity amount delivered at the power plant bus-bar (kWh);
Profit or loss resulted by the difference between planned and actual amounts of
foreign currency exchange rate versus GEL at the moment of purchasing fuel (gas,
masut, coal) for electricity generation by TPP and fuel purchasing price, which
is calculated according to the following formula: 38 cEXC(+) =[aV(-) × (aEXC(-)
× aP(-)- pEXC(-) × pP(-)] × ( + WACC (–)) × ( + WACC ) (10) where, aV(-) -
Actual amount of purchased fuel for the test year (-)(m3); aP(-) - Actual
contract price for fuel purchase (1000 m3in foreign currency) for the test year
(-) (GEL); pP(-) – Planned contract price for the fuel purchase (1000 m3 in
foreign currency) for the test year (-) (GEL); pEXC(-) – Planned exchange
currency rate for the test year (-); aEXC(-) – Actual exchange currency rate for
the test year (-); WACC - Rate of time value of the money, which is equal to
WACC; Profit or loss derived from the difference of planned and actual values of
specific cost for fuel (natural gas, masut, coal) necessary for generating
electricity by the TPP is calculated as follows: cEFF(+)=[aE(-) × pP(-) ×
pEXC(-) × (aEFF(-) - pEFF(-))] × ( + WACC (–)) × ( + WACC ) (11) where, aE(-) -
Actual amount of delivered electricity at the bus-bar for the test year (-)(m3);
pP(-) - – Planned contract price for the fuel purchase (1000 m3 in foreign
currency) for the test year (-) (GEL); pEXC(-) – Planned exchange currency rate
for the test year (-); pEFF(-) - Planned specific cost of fuel for the test year
(-) (m3/kWh); aEFF(-) - Actual specific cost of fuel for the test year (-)
(m3/kWh); WACC - Rate of time value of the money, which is equal to the WACC (%)
39 Article 16 Electricity Transmission Tariff  Electricity transmission tariffs
are set for transmission activity for electricity transmission licensee
Electricity transmission tariffs are set according to the following voltage
levels of electricity transmission grid: ) For 500 kv voltage; ) For 400 kv
voltage; ) For -35 kv voltage; ) For -10 kv voltage  Transmission tariff for the
Tariff Year is calculated according to the following formula: 𝑹𝑪𝑩𝒊(+) 𝑬𝒊
𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒏𝒔𝒎𝒊𝒔𝒔𝒊𝒐𝒏(+)   Transm(+) = (12) where,   Transm(+) - transmission tariff of
-level voltage (GEL/kWh); RCB  (+) - regulatory cost base value of transmission
licensee on -level voltage for the Tariff Year (+) (GEL);  iTransm(+) - Total
amount of transmitted electricity in delivery points via transmission grid on -
level voltage, and while calculating the tariff of  new 400 kv transmission line
for cross-border transit the total amount of exported electricity via this line
(kWh);  – corresponding level of transmission grid voltage  For calculating the
tariff envisaged in the paragraph  of this article, the Commission is authorized
to consider received or receivable revenues from electricity transit through the
territory of Georgia by the transmission licensee In such case, the regulatory
cost base of transmission licensee is reduced with received or receivable
revenues from electricity transit Article 17 Electricity Dispatch Tariff
Dispatch tariff for the Tariff Year is calculated according to the following
formula: 𝑹𝑪𝑩(+)  𝒅𝒊𝒔𝒑𝒂𝒕𝒄𝒉(+)  dispatch(+) =  100 (13) Where, 40  dispatch(+) -
incurred service by dispatch licensee for the Tariff Year (+) (tetri/kWh); RCB
(+) - Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year (+) (GEL);  dispatch(+) - Amount
of consumed (metered) electricity by the qualified enterprises in delivery
points (kWh) Article 18 Electricity Market Operator Tariff  Electricity Market
Operator service tariff is defined for the service for which qualified
enterprises pay service fee to electricity market operator according to current
legislation, which is calculated according to the following formula: 𝑹𝑪𝑩(+)  (+)
Top(+) =  100 (14) where, Top(+) - Electricity Market Operator tariff for the
Tariff Year (+) (tetri/kWh); RCB (+) - Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year
(+) (GEL);  (+) - The amount of electricity for the Tariff Year for which
Electricity Market Operator provides service for qualified enterprises during
the tariff calculation year (kWh)  RCB of the Electricity Market Operator, based
on the functional characteristics of the utility, is calculated according to
this methodology by following formula: RCB(+) = ((+) +OPEX(+)) × (+) (15),
where, RCB(+) - RCB for the (+) Tariff Year(GEL); (+) – depreciation for tariff
year (GEL); OPEX(+) - Operating Costs for the Tariff Year (GEL);  – Profit rate
related to cost, it is taken no more than  percent, which is defined by the
Commission annually  Income received from import-export activity by the
Electricity Market Operator, and also taxes and expanses received from this
activity according to the current legislation, is not considered while
calculating Electricity Market Operator tariff 41 Chapter IV Tariff Correction
Article 19 Tariff Correction Principles and Main Mechanisms  This methodology
envisages the reflection of planned indicators (operational costs and
electricity amounts) in the RCB while calculating tariff Therefore, the
Commission is authorized to carry out the tariff correction with Cost Correction
Factor for the Tariff Year, which is based on the following: ) operational costs
) amount of electricity ) profit from non-operational activity  Cost Correction
Factor is calculated as follows: CORR(+) = cOPEX(+) - cREV(+) - nopREV(+) (16)
where, CORR(+) - Cost Correction Factor for the Tariff Year (+)(GEL); cOPEX(+) -
difference between planned and actual operational costs for the test year(-),
reflected in the Tariff Year (+)(GEL); cREV(+) - Difference between planned and
actual revenues for the test year(-), according to the correction principles in
the article 20 of this Methodology, reflected in the Tariff Year (+)(GEL);
nopREV(+) - profit gained by the utility from the utilization of assets in non-
regulated activities reflected in RAB and selling of assets out of service, also
positive difference from the connection of new consumers to the electricity
transmission line of the utility, and also funds received for financing
operational costs from the third party in the test year (-)(GEL) Article 20
Correction of operational costs  If actual operational costs incurred by the
utility for the Tariff Year differs from the operational costs envisaged while
setting relevant tariff, then the Commission ensures the correction of RCB
according to the following formula: cOPEX(+) = [(aOPEX(–) – pOPEX(–)) × ( + WACC
(–)) × ( + WACCt) (17) 42 where, cOPEX(+) - Corrected amount of operational
costs for the period of (+) (GEL); aOPEX(–) - Actual amount of operational costs
for the period of (-) (GEL); pOPEX(–) - Planned amount of operational costs for
the period of (-) (GEL); WACC – Rate of time value of the money, which is equal
to the WACC (%)  While correcting operational costs of the Electricity Market
Operator, the Commission does not consider time value rate and it is calculated
based on the following formula: cOPEX(+)= aOPEX(–) – pOPEX(–) (18) Article 21
Revenue Correction with Actual Amount of Electricity  If the actual delivered,
transmitted and dispatched electricity by the utility differs from the planned
amounts, the Commission provides the correction of RCB according to the
following formula: cRev(+)= [(aE (–) – pE (–)) × (–)] × ( + WACC (–)) × ( + WACC
) (19) where, cRev(+) – Corrected cost of revenues for the period of (+) (GEL);
aE (–) - Actual amount of delivered, transmitted and dispatched electricity in
the grid for the period of (-) (GEL); pE (–) - Planned amount of delivered,
transmitted and dispatched electricity in the grid for the period of (-) (GEL);
(–) - tariff for the period of (-) (GEL); WACC – Rate of the time value of the
money, which is equal to the WACC  Correction mechanism defined in the paragraph
is applied to that amount of electricity transmitted to the network by TPP,
which is not guaranteed capacity source  The Commission does not consider
correction mechanism defined in the paragraph  of this article if actual amount
of the delivered and transmitted electricity shortage in the grid with respect
to the planned is due to the utility  While correcting the amount of electricity
and the guaranteed capacity for which the Electricity Market Operator tariff is
calculated under current legislation, the Commission does not use time value
rate and it is calculated according to the following formula: cRev(+)= (aE(–) –
pE(–)) × (–) (20) 43 CHAPTER  TARIFF SETTING AND APPLICATION SUBMISSION
PROCEDURES Article 22 Accounting and Reporting  For the regulated purposes the
utility is obligated to carry out its financial accounting and reporting based
on the Uniform System of Accounts approved by the Commission, according to
current legislation  If the utility carries out more than one regulated activity
as well as non–regulated activity, it is obligated to unbundle its revenues,
costs and financial accounts for each regulated activity  The utility should
submit information about assets created by the consumer financing separately as
requested by this Methodology Article 23 Required Documents for Tariff Setting
For the purpose of tariff setting for each Tariff Calculation Year utility has
to submit the tariff application in the Commission  Tariff application and data
forms, as well as  list of documents to be submitted along with the tariff
application are determined by individual administrative - legal act of the
Commission  Along with the Tariff application the utility shall also submit the
following documents prepared and audited in accordance with the IFRS: ) Balance
Sheet ) Profit and Loss Statement ) Cash Flow Statement  The Commission is
authorized to request from the utility other additional information if finds
appropriate The responsibility on the accuracy of the information contained in
the tariff application lies on the party submitting the application 44 Article
24 Tariff Setting Timeline and Procedures  The utility is obliged to submit
tariff application to the Commission no later than 150 days prior to the expiry
of the existing tariff  The Commission reviews the compliance of tariff
application with the approved form and its completeness within three days upon
submission  If the Commission finds tariff application incomplete or it does not
correspond with the approved form, it sets the deadline in written form of no
more than 45 days for amending this This period shall be extended only once at
the request of the applicant, for no more than 15 days  If the tariff
application is not submitted in time defined in paragraph  of this Article, it
remains unconsidered according to the decision of the Commission If unconsidered
tariff application was submitted due to legislation, sanctions shall be imposed
on the company in accordance with the law  The Commission is authorized to make
relevant decision and review the utility’ tariffs on its own initiative In this
case the provisions of submitting necessary information and documentations are
determined by the relevant decisions of the Commission  Upon acceptance of
properly submitted application and in case of paragraph  of this Article, the
Commission starts public administrative proceedings and the notice shall be
published on the Commission web site  Tariff application is reviewed according
to public administrative proceeding rule under Georgian legislation Therefore,
tariff application and enclosed documents (except for personal information
relating to identifiable persons, as well as commercially confidential
information considered by the Commission) are public and shall be available to
any interested party  All the interested parties are authorized to get familiar
with materials presented to the Commission and provide their comments  Comments
on the tariff application shall be submitted in written form and shall include
justified argumentations In addition, the interested party is entitled not to
indicate the identity while submitting own comments, the copy of comment shall
be sent to tariff applicant, and the opinions are reviewed at the public hearing
of tariff application In the process of reviewing the tariff application, the
Commission is authorized to request submitting of additional documentation or
different types of conclusions from the utility In the process of reviewing the
tariff application before reaching the final decision, the Commission is
authorized to organize meetings and/or public hearings for the review of the
tariff application Applicant shall be notified about the time and venue of the
public hearing seven days in advance 45 CHAPETR VI TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 25 Transitional Provisions  The values of the components of Weighted
Avarege Cost of Capital (WACC) are defined as follows:  Risk free rate rrf- - 50
%  Debt premium (DP) - 50 %  Market risk premium (rm- rrf) - 25%  Sectorial risk
factor () – 00  For the utilities, tariffs of which are set by the Commission
including August 31, 2014, tariffs shall be set from September , 2014 including
December 31, 2015 under this Methodology;  Corrections envisaged in the Chapter
of this Methodology shall be carried out from 2016 (except for the corrections
by profits gained from non-operational activities envisaged in subparagraph “”
of paragraph  of article 19 of this Methodology) on yearly basis Cost Cascading
Method Cost Cascading (allocation) mechanism of allocating different voltage
levels to the consumers (2nd stage of cost allocation), according to the energy
consumption by voltage levels: G1 – Energy supply from Generation to the first
level G2 – Energy supply from Generation to the second level G3 – Energy supply
from Generation to the third level; 46 L1 – Total losses on the first level; L2
– Total losses on the second level; L3 – Total losses on the third level; C11 –
Delivered energy to the first level consumers (consumption on the first level);
C12 – Energy supply from first level to the second level; C1 = C11 + C12, Total
delivered energy from the first level (G1 - L1); C22 – Delivered energy to the
second level consumers (consumption on the second level); C23 - Delivered energy
to the second level from the third level; C2= C22+ C23, Total delivered energy
from the second level (G2 + C12 - L2); C33 - Delivered energy to the third level
consumers (consumption on the third level); S11 = C11/ C1 - Energy share
consumed by first level consumers in the total delivered energy from this level
S22 = C22/ C2 - Energy share consumed by second level consumers in the total
delivered energy from this level S33 = C33/ C3 - Energy share consumed by third
level consumers in the total delivered energy from this level Cost Cascading
(allocation) mechanism is based on energy consumptions on separate voltage
levels S1 = S11 × Cost1 , Allocated share of loss value (and other costs) to the
first level consumers is defined as first level cost (Cost1) to be allocated to
the same level consumers, so S11 factor is multiplied by first level cost S2 =
S22 × Cost2 + S22 × (( - S11) × Cost1), Allocated share of loss value (and other
costs) to the second level consumers consists of two components The first one
defines the share of the second level cost (Cost2) to be attributed to the same
level consumers, so S22 factor is multiplied by the cost allocated to the second
level And the second component determines the share of the first level cost
(Cost2) to be attributed to the second level consumers For this purpose, the
residual share of the first level cost (not attributed to the first level
consumers) is taken, from which the part is attributed to the second level that
corresponds to the consumed energy share by the second level consumers in the
total delivered energy from the same level 47 S3 = S33 × Cost3 + S33 × (( - S22)
× Cost2) + S33 × (( - S22) × ( - S11) × Cost1), Allocated share of loss value
(and other costs) to the third level consumers consists of three components The
first one defines the share of the third level cost (Cost3) to be attributed to
the same level consumers, so S33 factor (that equals to 100%) is multiplied by
the cost allocated to the third level And the second component determines the
share of the second level cost (Cost2) to be attributed to the third level
consumers and is residual share of second level cost (not attributed to the
second level consumers), that is totally attributed to the third level (as S33 =
100%) And the second component determines the share of the first level cost
(Cost1) to be attributed to the third level consumers For this purpose, the
residual share of the first level cost (not attributed to the first level
consumers) is taken, from which the part is attributed to the third level
consumer which was not attributed to the second level consumers In order to
identify total energy delivered from each voltage level (C1, C2 and C3) it is
necessary to know the amount of total loss according to voltage levels (L1, L2
and L3) In case when information about losses is total and its allocation by
voltage levels is not available, then the regulator shall allocate the losses to
voltage levels with maximum possible approximation based on available data 48
Annex N3 Regulated assets depreciation/amortization rates of utilities under
tariff regulation  The following rates of regulated assets
depreciation/amortization are used for the assets created or purchased by the
utilities under tariff regulation after January1, 2014: Annual rate of
Depreciation/ Amortization (%) Useful life (year) Common assets  Transport
facilities  30  Operational buildings  55  Administrative building  65
Substation Building  45  Warehouse areas  20  10  Furniture and moving inventory
IT and office equipment Instruments / Equipments 10  Light vehicles  Heavy
vehicles and special techniques 10  12 Intangible Assets 11 Annual rate of
Depreciation/ Amortization (%) Useful life (year) Stations II TTP 12 Condensing
power plants  25 Thermotechnical part   25 Gas turbine  30 49 Ancillary
Facilities (Water preparation, Fuel preparation and etc)  25 Environmental
Equipment  15 Building (Chimney, Scatter Refrigerator, Fuel Storage and etc)  45
HPP 13 Accumulative structures  60 Dam, Head building, diversion and other
hydrotechnical buildings  45 Other equipments and facilities of HPP  30 Wind
Power Plant 14  25 Solar Power plant 15  25 power unit 16  25 Protective,
metering devices, remote control, telecommunication, remote meters and automated
devices 17  25 Power units of power plants, including transformers, Commutation
and Distribution facilities 18  45 Other Electric facilities of Power Plant 19
25 Annual rate of Depreciation/ Amortization (%) Useful life (year) Grid
Components III Overhead lines (500 -400 - 330 - 220 - 110 kV)  45 Power units of
substations, including transformers, Commutation and Distribution facilities  40
Protective, metering devices and protection from over voltage , remote control,
telecommunication, and automated devices  25 Other  25 35–10–– kV 21 50 Overhead
lines (35–10––, kV)  35 Underground lines ( 35–10––, kV )  40 Power units of
medium voltage substations, including transformers, Commutation and Distribution
facilities  35 Protective, metering devices and protection from over voltage ,
remote control, telecommunication, and automated devices  25 To  kV 22 Overhead
lines (to  kV)  35 Underground lines (to  kV)  40 Protective, metering devices
and protection from over voltage , remote control, telecommunication, and
automated devices  35 Meters 23  20 Converters , HVDC, Compensatory Devices 24
25 Telephone lines 25  35 Stationary Crane, freight elevators, outdoor lighting
and other ancillary equipments 26  30 51