Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework: Page:  II Programme priorities and partnerships: Page:
III Programme and risk management   : Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation :
Page:  DP/DCP/GEO/  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework  Since restoring independence in 1991, Georgia has sought
to achieve the prosperity, stability and security that membership of the
European Union connotes to the Georgian public Georgia has made tangible
progress on this path, including most significantly its signing of an
Association Agreement with the European Union in  In tandem with its strong
commitment to European integration, Georgia is energetically pursuing the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) It has nationalized 93 priority targets and
established  robust interministerial mechanism to coordinate national efforts
and monitor progress, including through voluntary national reviews1 presented at
the United Nations High-Level Political Forums on Sustainable Development in
2016 and  The two agendas are increasingly recognized as complementary The
Association Agreement alone incorporates 63 per cent of the country’
nationalized SDG targets Taken together, they map out  clearly sign-posted
development pathway for Georgia and provide  mutually reinforcing framework for
United Nations work in 2021- As Georgia marks 30 years of independence, it can
take pride in its achievements building democratic institutions Governance
standards reflect high aspirations; the country’ accomplishments in this area
have been widely recognized, including in the latest round of the World Bank
worldwide governance indicators Yet challenges remain Georgia shifted to  fully
parliamentary system of governance in 2019, responding to perceived imbalances
in the division of power, but the political scene remains turbulent and
polarised Demands persist for further reforms of the judicial system, law
enforcement and the civil service  Georgia has also achieved sturdy economic
growth Gross domestic product (GDP) grew by  per cent per year on average in ,
and GDP per capita rose to $,764 in 2019 (from $,351 in 1991), boosting Georgia
to upper-middle-income status Poverty measured by national standards fell to per
cent in 2019 (from per cent in 2007)  Finding an economic model capable of
sustaining rapid growth and delivering widespread prosperity has been an ongoing
focus since independence Sweeping market-based reforms were adopted early on to
encourage foreign investment and stimulate entrepreneurship Creating  positive
business environment has been  long-standing priority, rewarded with  seventh-
place ranking among 190 countries in the World Bank Doing Business report Recent
policies have emphasised social welfare, by establishing  universal health-care
system and expanding targeted social assistance, which benefits per cent of the
population  Debate continues on how to accelerate economic progress Although
exports grew from 16 to 54 per cent of GDP between 2000 and 2019, they are not
yet competitive enough to lift the country to prosperity The Deep and
Comprehensive Free Trade Area established under the Association Agreement has
yet to reach its full potential Georgia remains  net importer of food, and
three-fourths of agricultural exports come from wine, water, spirits and nuts
Tourism has been  notable bright spot, soaring to  million visitors and $
billion in revenues in Already, the sector accounts for over  per cent of GDP
and 78 per cent of service exports But the border closures forced by the
COVID-19 pandemic have reversed this trend, prompting policymakers to seek new
opportunities to diversify the economy  Pandemic-driven stresses have also
evoked fresh concern about groups whose members risk missing out on the country’
successes These include the poor, residents of rural, remote and high-mountain
areas, inactive young people, women, persons with disabilities, minorities,
conflict-affected communities, and people living in areas prone to natural
disasters These groups were the focus of the common country analysis that shaped
the new   /19  DP/DCP/GEO/ United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework (UNSDCF), and the new UNDP programme has been designed to reflect the
commitment ‘to leave no one behind’  Despite  remarkable decline in poverty, one
in five Georgians remains poor by national standards, and  per cent meet the
$-per-day World Bank definition of extreme poverty Georgia has  pronounced
urban-rural divide  full one-third of the population lives in Tbilisi, and the
capital acts as  magnet for migration from the villages At the same time, over
40 per cent of Georgians live in rural areas and depend on farming for  living
Yet agriculture delivers just  per cent of GDP While subsistence farming can
help rural families weather crises (including the pandemic), this disparity is
arguably the single biggest constraint to economic development in Georgia
Productivity is low: an average worker’ value-added in agriculture is just one
tenth that in industry or services Most rural dwellers are self-employed or
unpaid workers on family farms, while more secure wage work is mainly urban
Rural poverty, at per cent, is higher than the urban rate, per cent At 31 per
cent in 2019, Georgia has  very high share of youth aged  who are not in
education, employment or training (NEET) The share is far higher for young
women: 37 per cent versus 25 per cent for men The cause: an education system
that falls short on functional literacy and the skills (soft and hard) that
would make young people employable Although equal rights are fully guaranteed by
law and gender attitudes are shifting2, women still face discrimination and
inequality in many areas They hold only 14 per cent of parliamentary seats and
just one of 64 mayoral positions They face an percentage-point gap in labour
activity rates, owing to the burden of unpaid care work They earn an average
wage that is just 64 per cent that for men yet they have higher educational
attainments Occupations are gender-segregated: almost 90 per cent of teachers
are women, yet only 12 per cent of engineering students are female One in five
women experiences sexual harassment; one in seven faces violence at the hands of
an intimate partner The lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex
(LGBTQI) community is arguably the most marginalized Discrimination based on
sexual orientation and gender identity is illegal, but LGBTQI persons routinely
encounter bias, hate speech and violence Georgia ratified the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2014, but persons with
disabilities still struggle for their rightful place in society Only  per cent
are registered for disability benefits, whereas global norms suggest the actual
share of the population with some form of disability must be around 15 per cent
Stigma leads families to keep disability hidden, so few children with
disabilities attend school or enter the labour force (only 133 persons with
disabilities are employed in the public sector) Disability is still assessed
using  medical rather than social model Physical barriers are widespread, as are
disempowering stereotypes  new UNDP survey4 suggests that attitudes are
changing, but 43 per cent of the population still believe that assistance for
people with disabilities is  form of Government charity rather than  state
obligation Conflict-affected communities face daunting challenges on both sides
of the dividing lines Georgia has one of the world’ highest displacement rates:
286,216 persons, or  per cent of the population, are currently registered as
internally displaced persons (IDPs) Georgian authorities have promoted
integration into host communities, but many IDPs remain isolated and dependent
on state benefits Only 45 per cent have received purpose-built  UNDP/UNFPA
(2020) “Men, women, and gender relations in Georgia: Public perceptions and
attitudes” (  UN-Women (2020) “Country gender equality profile of Georgia” (
gender-equality-profile)  UNDP (2020) “Public attitudes towards persons with
disabilities in Georgia” (  /19 DP/DCP/GEO/ housing, leaving thousands living in
‘collective centres’ Job opportunities and social amenities remain scarce for
both IDPs and people living along and across the dividing lines Although
laudable progress has been made in adopting international standards, including
the Paris Climate Agreement, Georgia faces significant environmental challenges
Seismic risk is high With climate change disrupting weather patterns, floods,
droughts, landslides and mudslides have become more frequent and destructive
Each year $258 million is spent on flood recovery Precipitation and temperature
extremes risk disrupting the hydropower supply, and other renewables (wind,
solar, geothermal) currently amount to just  per cent of the energy balance
Urban air pollution contains high levels of harmful particulates, with
measurable negative impact on health As of 2020, 11 per cent of the national
territory has been designated as protected areas, but illegal logging and other
incursions underline the need for better management and more sustainable use of
natural resources Improving the well-being of groups at risk of being left
behind while working towards enduring peace and prosperity for all Georgians is
the unifying UNDP vision for 2021-The new country programme was developed in
tandem with the UNSDCF and directly incorporates four of the five joint outcomes
The UNDP theory of change mirrors that of the UNSDCF: it locates the root causes
of poverty and inequality in structural factors – the quality of governance
institutions, the structure of the economy and the legacy of conflict – and
proposes structural solutions to address these challenges in  sustainable
fashion The new programme builds on sturdy foundations The 2019 independent
country programme evaluation (ICPE) said UNDP work in  was “highly relevant and
strategically positioned” and called UNDP  “trustworthy and respected strategic
partner for both the Government and the international community” Achievements
cited include: strengthening Parliament and civil society; improving
transparency and accountability; defining decentralization policies; protecting
human rights; furthering gender equality; advancing rural development;
modernizing vocational education; improving social services; keeping
communications open across dividing lines; reducing greenhouse gas emissions;
enhancing flood resistance; building urban resilience; and enlarging protected
areas Looking ahead, UNDP aims to provide more integrated solutions, bridging
different sectors and applying multiple areas of expertise to address
simultaneously the diverse root causes of poverty and inequality As underlined
in the ICPE, this integrated approach presents particular promise at the
municipal level, where UNDP efforts in local governance, rural development and
disaster risk reduction can combine to generate new synergies UNDP will continue
to add value by combining top-down policy advice from global expert networks
with bottom-up solutions pioneered through hands-on implementation This mutually
reinforcing process of blending policy and practice was praised by the ICPE as
particularly effective when UNDP programming is sustained over multi-year
periods (judged as the minimum necessary to build on initial pilots and deliver
sustainable change) This multisectoral approach also underpins the UNDP role as
‘integrator’ for Agenda 2030 within the United Nations system UNDP will work to
create  platform for other organizations to apply specialized policy advice,
normative guidance and tested practices, with UNDP anchoring  system-wide effort
supporting national partners in promoting and measuring progress towards the
SDGs UNDP already partners with other organizations in 20 per cent of its
programming; such collaboration will grow stronger Joint issues-based advocacy
efforts will complement the quest for shared results under the UNSDCF At the
same time, UNDP will fulfil its role as the United Nations technical lead agency
for COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery by helping to interweave different strands
of analysis and programming into  single cohesive response It will also provide
expertise to contribute to the ongoing debate about possible new pathways to
prosperity for Georgia    DP/DCP/GEO/ UNDP has already established  reputation
for innovation in Georgia, working with partners such as the award-winning
Public Service Hall to introduce -services and the city of Rustavi to engage
citizens directly in addressing post-industrial urban legacies Building on
numerous -initiatives launched in response to COVID-19, UNDP will continue to
apply ‘digital disruption’ to improve governance, bridge distances, increase
competitiveness and advance social cohesion The accelerator lab established in
2020 will help ensure that UNDP initiatives leverage technology and apply human-
centred design and behavioural science II Programme priorities and partnerships
The new UNDP country programme will support national development priorities by
focusing on the intertwined goals of European integration and sustainable
development, relying on the complementarity of the Association Agreement with
the SDGs to multiply their impact In tandem, it will help respond to the
COVID-19 pandemic by protecting lives and livelihoods in the short term and
seeking ways to ‘build forward better’ in the long term The country programme
has roots in the findings of the mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support
(MAPS) exercise that UNDP led on behalf of the United Nations system, together
with the Government Administration, in This broad participatory exercise yielded
consensus around four high-impact solutions: decentralized development; human
rights and equality; investing in youth and rural areas; and green energy and
sustainable cities Following these analytical signposts and drawing on all six
signature solutions in the UNDP Strategic Plan, the new country programme maps
out four solution pathways  Improving governance for equality and justice
Building on years of work supporting national aspirations to establish model
democratic institutions, UNDP will focus on utilizing legislative frameworks to
deliver tangible results and translating standards and principles adopted in
past years into everyday practice UNDP will:  Continue to assist the Parliament
in undertaking its expanded role as the country’ core decision-making
institution and monitor media during elections; ii Continue to support public
administration reform, focused on building  more merit- based, non-partisan
civil service, enhancing whole-of-government policy planning and coordination,
fostering public participation, helping standardize and improve the quality of
public service delivery, advance -services and mainstream transparency and
accountability; iii Work to realize the potential of decentralization to promote
good governance, improve public services and enhance economic prospects at the
local level, particularly in rural, remote and high-mountain areas, and strive
to improve social cohesion and overcome alienation in areas with  large share of
national minorities; iv Assist institutions and civil society in monitoring
national compliance with human rights standards, while directly supporting
persons with disabilities, the LGBTQI community and other at-risk groups, and
promote diversity and tolerance as positive social values;  Collaborate with
other United Nations organizations to advance gender equality in three main
areas: ) Promoting women’ political participation, particularly at local level,
where  gender quota applies for the 2021 municipal elections;  UNDP (2019)
“Accelerating progress towards the SDGs: Identifying priority areas for action
in Georgia” (  /19 DP/DCP/GEO/ ) Seeking to expand women’ opportunities for
skills development and employment and reduce the gender wage gap; and ) Building
the foundations of  care economy, demonstrating that public spending on care
services is an investment with  triple payoff: new jobs for women, improved care
for vulnerable persons, and relief from the unpaid care work that so often
hinders women’ employment; and vi Contribute to judicial reform and rule of law
and expand access to justice by making mediation and other forms of alternative
dispute resolution more readily available  Safeguarding  green, clean and
climate-resilient environment UNDP will continue to assist in providing policy
advice, legislative support and practical work to help Georgia fulfil its
commitments on climate change and reduce carbon emissions across all sectors It
will work with central and local partners to improve the management and
financial sustainability of protected areas and promote renewable technologies
and energy-efficient solutions UNDP will support sustainable consumption,
building on European Union-backed concepts such as the circular economy and
extended producer responsibility The core focus of environmental work will be
seven-year, $74 million programme to prevent floods and other forms of climate-
driven disasters across all the regions of the country Measures to climate-proof
Georgia will include completing risk- and-hazard mapping of all 11 major river
basins, establishing  nationwide multi-hazard early warning system, constructing
nature-based protective solutions for at least 100 high-risk locations, and
building climate resilience at the community level  Unlocking the potential of
rural areas UNDP will take  two-pronged approach to bridging the urban-rural
divide: helping rural communities use the legal framework for decentralization
to improve socioeconomic prospects while professionalizing farming and improving
agricultural productivity Reform of the vocational training system will aim to
provide rural youth with the technical, digital and soft skills needed to thrive
in the private sector Diversification of the rural economic landscape will
continue, both by promoting non-farm livelihoods and building municipal capacity
to plan and manage local economic development from the bottom up Private-sector
competitiveness will be improved by applying approaches such as value-chain
strengthening and clustering Digitalization will be promoted as  way of saving
rural jobs and overcoming the isolation of village life Taken together, these
efforts will reduce poverty by creating rural jobs and slow emigration by
enhancing the attractiveness of life outside Tbilisi  Improving living
conditions for conflict-affected people To create an enabling environment for
sustainable peace and reconciliation between divided communities, UNDP will work
to enhance confidence building, strengthen civil society in conflict- affected
areas, and improve people-to-people contacts across dividing lines Provided that
access remains feasible, UNDP will continue to work in Abkhazia, Georgia to
enhance the quality of social services and help local communities improve living
conditions, including in mitigating the pandemic’ socioeconomic impact on
vulnerable groups UNDP will also work to reduce flood risks and seek to improve
environmental protection (for example, in waste management and nature
protection) UNDP will also support IDP communities and vulnerable people living
along dividing lines, with  particular emphasis on promoting economic self-
sufficiency for women Activities will expand to the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia if conditions allow To achieve these aims, UNDP will seek to
work with both traditional development partners and less conventional actors, in
an effort to secure resources for the programme and also help Georgia generate
sufficient funding to speed its progress towards the SDGs Active participation
in coordination mechanisms will help ensure that UNDP remains focused on those
areas where it can best deliver results, promote coherence and ensure
sustainability, while respecting the expertise and competence of actors
specialized for work in other fields /19  DP/DCP/GEO/ III Programme and risk
management Making this vision  reality requires mastering pandemic risks Thanks
to the flexibility of partners and donors, UNDP has managed to reorient
programming swiftly to face COVID- 19 challenges Given the pandemic’ unknown
trajectory and the increasingly volatile impact of climate change, UNDP will
strive to make agility and adaptability its hallmarks The national economy has
held up well in the face of pandemic stresses, with GDP forecast to rebound in
2021 after  decline of  per cent in This resilience owes much to support from
multilateral financial institutions, which have already dedicated $ billion to
help protect businesses and households But if COVID-19 consequences disrupt
economic recovery or reconfigure national priorities, UNDP is prepared to
reorient its programme UNDP is likely to face continued constraints in operating
in conflict-affected areas Transparency and strict adherence to humanitarian
principles will help mitigate this risk The country programme document outlines
UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at the
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures
and internal control framework The programme will be nationally executed If
necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or
all of the programme to enable response to force majeure The harmonized approach
to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
entities to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects IV Monitoring and evaluation Development progress will be monitored
against the indicators in the results and resources framework, which
incorporates nationalized SDG indicators and is aligned with the UNSCDF To
measure its contribution to national results, UNDP will employ the national SDG
tracker and other national monitoring systems, official statistical data and
reports from line ministries, development partners and research institutions
Perception surveys and other innovative tools will be used to assess results and
behavioural change The National Statistical Office and other partners will
receive support to improve data quality UNDP will strengthen its internal
capacity while helping external partners develop monitoring and evaluation
skills It will collaborate with other United Nations entities to monitor
progress towards UNSDCF results Independent evaluations will be commissioned to
assess UNDP contributions to transformative change Spending devoted to gender
equality will be tracked and exceed 15 per cent of total expenditure Evaluation
findings will be shared with Government and civil society counterparts,
development partners and the public  /19 DP/DCP/GEO/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Georgia () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Government programme
“Georgia 2020” recognizes the principles of democratic development, rule of law,
efficient administration, respect for human rights and basic freedoms as  basis
for its policy and strives its attainment UNSDCF, , OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By
2025, all people in Georgia enjoy improved good governance, more open, resilient
and accountable institutions, rule of law, equal access to justice, human
rights, and increased representation and participation of women in decision
making RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, , OUTCOME: Outcome  Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
(including indicators, baselines targets) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME
INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION,
AND RESPONSIBILITIES MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY
OUTCOME (United States dollars)  (UNSDCF indicator ) [National SDG ] Rule of law
index Baseline (2019): percentile rank 02 Target: >63 Regular: $437,500
Administration of the Government of Georgia (AOG); line ministries; Parliament,
Adjara Supreme Council, GEOSTAT; Ministry of Regional Development and
Infrastructure (MRDI), High Council of Justice, Human Rights Secretariat (HRS),
Personal Data Protection Inspector, Digital Governance Agency (DGA), Civil
Service Bureau (CSB), Public Service Development Agency, Public Service Hall,
Mediators Association of Georgia (MAG), National Association of Local
Authorities; Local self- governments; CSOs Output  Inclusive national and local
governance systems have greater resilience and capacities to mainstream gender,
ensure evidence-based and participatory policymaking, map and address
inequalities and deliver quality services to all •  Central Election Commission,
2024 (Parliamentary) 2021, 2025 (Local) Other: $21,566,482 • - Worldwide
governance indicators:  annually  (UNSDCF indicator ) [National SDG ] Voice and
accountability index Baseline (2019): percentile rank 20 Target: >54 • Indicator
Implementation rate of gender sensitive public administration reform (PAR)
strategy  Baseline (2020): %, strategy being prepared Target (2025): 70% of
strategy annual action plans pertaining to policy, civil service and public
service delivery implemented Source: PAR monitoring reports (AOG), European
Union sector assessment reports, annually  (UNSDCF indicator ) [National SDG ]
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments and local governments
Baseline (2019) ) Women in Parliament % (22 women) ) Women in local governments
% (277 women) Target: ) < 20%; ) < 20% • Indicator  Share of national-level
policies complying with new whole-of-government policy standards emphasizing
inclusiveness/participation approved by Government Baseline (2020): 10% Target
(2025): 85% Source: PAR monitoring reports (AOG), European Union sector
assessment reports, annually /19  DP/DCP/GEO/ • Indicator  Level of
professionalism of public servants at local and national levels to better serve
constituencies Baseline (2020): () Baseline on implementation of public
servants’ professional development plans to be established in 2021; () 15% of
public servants improved capacities by attending professional development
courses Target (2025): () 50% of public agencies fulfil organizational
professional development plans; () 50% of public servants (gender disaggregated)
Source: CSB human resource management system and annual reports, annually •
Indicator  Percentage of population satisfied with local self-governments
Baseline (2019): General: %; Urban: 64%; Rural 72%; high mountainous 80% Target
(2025): General: 69%, Urban: 65%; Rural 75%; High mountainous 82% Source: UNDP
citizens’ satisfaction with public services survey, biannually (2021, 2023,
2025) • Indicator  Municipal budget total receipts as  percentage of GDP
Baseline (2019): % Target (2025): % Source: MRDI  decentralization strategy
implementation report, annually • Indicator  Quality of evidence based and
participatory /19  DP/DCP/GEO/ law-making processes and executive oversight
Baseline (2020): Score 59 Target (2025): Score 65 Source: Georgia national
integrity system assessments, 2023, • Indicator  Number of digitized public
services added to Unified Citizens’ Portal (national -governance platform
mygovge) in response to COVID-19 pandemic Baseline (2020): 217 Target (2025): 50
Source: DGA reports, mygovge, annually Output  National legislation and policies
to eliminate all types of discrimination, deliver gender-equal results, enhance
human rights and equal access to justice, and equitable access to/universal
coverage of quality social services, especially for the most vulnerable and
marginalized • Indicator  Percentage of courts operating court mediation centres
with at least one completed referred mediation case Baseline (2020): 17% in
Tbilisi, Gori, Rustavi, Mtskheta operate mediation centres Target (2023): 75%
Source: MAG annual report, High Council of Justice decisions, annually •
Indicator  National human rights strategy (NHRS) 2021- 2030 implementation rate
Baseline (2020): Strategy being prepared Target (2025): 50% of objectives
implemented 10  DP/DCP/GEO/ Source: NHRS action plan reports by HRS, annually •
Indicator  State Inspector service institutional strategy  implementation rate
Baseline (2020): %, Strategy not adopted Target (2023): 70% of objectives
implemented Source: Strategy implementation reports, annually • Indicator
Public perception on human rights situation in Georgia Baseline (2018): 47%
reported state is not oriented to enhance human rights protection, 53% that
human rights are totally unprotected Target (2023): 60% consider state is
oriented to enhance human rights protection and rights are fully protected
Source: UNDP public opinion survey, 2023 • Indicator  Proportion of gender
equality chapter() of NHRS  implemented Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 30%
Source: AOG/Public Defender’ Office reports, annually • Indicator  Improved
inclusive and gender-sensitive legislation and policy ensuring rights of all
people with disabilities Baseline (2020): Rights of people with disabilities law
adopted in 2020, but legislation on accessible environment and information and
communication technology (ICT) accessibility 11  DP/DCP/GEO/ not in line with
international standards Target (2022): National accessibility plan approved;
Guidelines on accessible ICT national standards approved Source: Official
Gazette of Legal Acts ( 2022 NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National Environmental
Action Programme- () Strategic Objective : Improving the status of the
environment and ensuring the protection/sustainable use of natural resources and
preventing/minimizing risks that threaten human health and the welfare of the
population UNSDCF, , OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By 2025, all people, without
discrimination, enjoy enhanced resilience through improved environmental
governance, climate action and sustainable management and use of natural
resource() in Georgia RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, , OUTCOME: Outcome
Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises  (UNSDCF indicator ) [National SDG ]
Country communicated establishment of integrated policy/strategy/plan which
increases country’ ability to adapt to adverse impacts of climate change, and
foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions development Baseline
(2015): In 2015 Georgia adopted intended nationally determined contributions
(INDC) The following are prepared: () Climate action plan (CAP), ; () Nationally
determined contributions (NDC), 2021- 2030; Target (2025): () Updated NDC
approved by Government and submitted to UNFCCC; () National action plan for
energy sector produced (2023); () Long-term low emissions development strategies
(LTLEDS) elaborated/adopted (2021); () Third biennial update report (BUR)
(2022); () Fourth national communication to UNFCCC (2021) Regular: $437,500
MEPA, MRDI, MIA, National Security Council Apparatus, National Environmental
Agency, National Food Agency, Agriculture- Scientific Research Centre,
Environmental Information and Education Centre, Emergency Management Service,
Caucasus Nature Fund, NGOs Output  Environmental governance and institutional
capacity enhanced to enable rational, equitable and sustainable use of
natural/land resources, to ensure conservation of ecosystems, use of innovative
and climate-friendly technologies for inclusive green economy, energy efficiency
and clean energy production, and make communities more resilient to
environmental shocks •  Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture
(MEPA)/UNFCCC websites, annually Other: $34,160,197 • Indicator  Targeted
protected areas under improved management and annual long- term funding Baseline
(2017):  ha, $650,000 Target (2023): 431,872 has, $950,000 Source: MEPA
protected areas database, 2023 • Indicator  [National SDG ]: Number of local
governments that adopt and implement local disaster risk reduction (DRR)
strategies in line with national DRR strategy Baseline (2020):  Target (2025):
10 local governments have local DRR strategies, including gender- 12
DP/DCP/GEO/ sensitive disaster preparedness and response plans for multiple
climate-induced hazards Source: UNDP, annually • Indicator : Number of
initiatives aimed at capacity- building for government and other stakeholders in
mainstreaming gender in formulating, monitoring and implementing national
climate change policies and plans Baseline (2020):  3a Gender-sensitive
socioeconomic vulnerability assessment methodology developed/applied 3b
Standardized methodologies and standard operating procedures for multi- hazard
risk-informed, preparedness and response plans developed considering gender and
vulnerable groups 3c Gender-sensitive institutional and legal frameworks in
place to roll-out standardized multi-hazard mapping and risk assessment
methodology 3d Gender-sensitive capacity development plans put in place to
enhance knowledge on nation- wide multi-hazard mapping and risk assessment
Source: UNDP, annually Output  Climate-sensitive, resilient and risk-informed
development promoted across all sectors in rural and urban areas to increase
adaptive capacities and mitigate climate change impact • Indicator  Adaptation
and mitigation capacities are increased through enhanced use of climate
information, products and services and well-established 13  DP/DCP/GEO/ multi-
hazard early warning systems (MHEWS), including at community level Baseline: 1a
Hydrometric monitoring network outdated/inadequate; 1b  multi-hazard and risk
maps; 1c MHEWS and forecasting for climate-induced hazards does not exist; 1d
risk reduction measures, based on multi-hazard risk maps, in high-risk areas; 1e
community-based climate risk management/EWS Target: 1a Improved hydro and
agrometeorological network; 1b maps for 11 river basins; 1c established and
functional; 1d 12 measures implemented; 1e applied in 100 communities Source:
UNDP, annually • Indicator  Number of gender-responsive technological solutions,
initiatives/projects, per LTLEDS in place/applied Baseline: LTLEDS under
elaboration,  projects/initiatives Target (2025):  Source: LTLEDS implementation
report, 2023, 2025 NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: “Georgia 2020” priorities under
strategic direction , improved competitiveness of private sector:  Improved
investment and business environment;  Support development of innovations and
technologies;  Support export growth Strategic direction  prioritizes
development of labour force according to labour market requirements and
particularly:  Developing vocational education and training UNSDCF, , OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : By 2025, all people without discrimination benefit from
sustainable, inclusive and resilient economy in Georgia RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC
PLAN, , OUTCOME: Outcome  Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and
dimensions  (UNSDCF indicator ) [National SDG ] Proportion of population,
including children, living below national poverty line, by location and sex
Output  Improved competitiveness of private sector and labour force, especially
youth and vulnerable groups through labour policy, private sector MEPA, MESD;
Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sport (MESCS); business
organizations; trade Regular: $437,500 • -: GEOSTAT Other: $21,565,389 14
DP/DCP/GEO/ Baseline (2015): Georgia: % Urban: 18%, Rural: %; Age Groups: -17:
%, : 22%, 65 and above: %; Female: % Male: 22% Target (2030): Reduce by 20%
unions; professional organizations; VET colleges; universities; private training
providers development, social responsibility and skills development • Indicator
Number of new services (advisory, finance instruments) introduced by public and
private business development providers within business development and
innovations ecosystem, including in regions Baseline (2020): Limited number of
services Target (2025):  new services Source: UNDP, annually  (UNSDCF indicator
) [National SDG ] Unemployment rate, by sex, age and persons with disabilities
Baseline (2015): All: %; Female: %; Male: %; Age Groups: : %, : %, : %, : %, :
%, > 65: % Target (2030): All: % • Indicator  Percentage of supported companies
in selected sectors demonstrating at least 20% increased turnover or exports
Baseline (2020): %; Target (2025) 50%; Source: UNDP, annually  (UNSDCF indicator
) [National SDG ] Proportion of youth ( years) not in education, employment or
training (NEET), by sex Baseline (2019): % Target: Reduce by % • Indicator
Number of public-private partnerships providing life-long learning established,
targeting vocational soft, digital/future and other skills Baseline (2020):
Target (2025):  Source: UNDP, annually • Indicator  Number of targeted farmers
receiving extension services that increase income by 15% Baseline (2020): ,040
(30% women) Target (2022) (incl baseline): ,200 (30% women) Source: UNDP,
annually • Indicator  Percentage of public vocational education and 15
DP/DCP/GEO/ training (VET) college graduates employed/self-employed Baseline
(2018): 62% Target (2025): 67% Source: MESCS tracer study, annually Indicator
Number of companies supported to mitigate impact and recover from COVID-19
crisis Baseline (2020):  Target (2023): 60 companies Source: UNDP, annually •
Output  Sustainable and inclusive rural and agriculture development and improved
livelihoods • Indicator  Annual action plans of agriculture and rural
development strategy (ARDS), , per cent implemented Baseline: % Target (2025):
70% annually Source: Annual implementation reports, annually • Indicator  Number
of newly created official jobs in supported rural non-farm enterprises in
selected regions Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 300 Source: UNDP, Agriculture
and Rural Development Agency records, annually • Indicator  Number of forest and
protected area hectares under sustainable and climate- resilient management
benefitting targeted rural population Baseline (2017):  Target (2022): 420,000
ha (2022) Source: MEPA, annually 16  DP/DCP/GEO/ • Indicator  Number of
businesses and households benefitting from energy efficiency, renewable energy,
digital and other technologies Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 300 businesses
and households Source: UNDP, annually NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Government
programme for  prioritizes conflict resolution and community resilience through
peace building, public diplomacy, socioeconomic empowerment and support to
conflict-affected communities with active engagement of local and international
partners UNSDCF, , OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By 2025, conflict affected
communities enjoy human rights, enhanced human security and resilience RELATED
UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, , OUTCOME: Outcome  Strengthen resilience to shocks and
crises  (UNSDCF indicator ) Political stability and absence of violence index
Baseline (2019): percentile rank - 05; Target (2025): >30 Output  Conflict-
affected populations have improved access to essential services, including
education, healthcare, gender-based violence (GBV) response/legal assistance and
improved socioeconomic conditions, community resilience and self-reliance State
Minister for Reconciliation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, CSOs, international
organizations, United Nations organizations Regular: $437,500 • World governance
indicators ( wgi/Home/Reports) Other: $21,564,911 • - Institute for Economics
and Peace (  (UNSDCF indicator ) Global peace index Baseline (2020): rank 95
(score: 116); Target (2025): <94 •  Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and
Security ( index/chapters/) • Indicator  Number of cases of legal services
received by conflict-affected persons (including GBV survivors) by sex Baseline
(2019): 640 (82% women) Target (2025): 920 (80% women) Source: UNDP, annually
(UNSDCF indicator ) Positive peace index Baseline (2019): rank 54 (score: );
Target (2025): <53;  (UNSDCF indicator ) Women, peace and security index
Baseline (2019): rank 46 (value 777) Target (2025): <45 • Indicator  Number of
cases of psychological assistance services received by conflict- affected
persons (including GBV survivors) by sex Baseline (2019): 757, 94% women Target
(2025): ,177, 95% women Source: UNDP, annually • Indicator  Number of conflict-
affected youngsters with 17  DP/DCP/GEO/ improved access to schools, VET
colleges and university Baseline (2019): 20,174 (40% female youth) Target
(2025): 31,578 (50% female youth) Source: UNDP, annually • Indicator  Number of
conflict-affected population with improved access to essential healthcare
services Baseline (2019): 10,886 (about 60% female youth) Target (2025): 16,054
(50% female youth) Source: UNDP, annually • Indicator  Number of people
benefiting directly from improved socioeconomic conditions and improved human
security Baseline (2019): ,362 (51% women) Target (2025): 14,742 (50% women)
Source: UNDP, annually • Indicator  Number of people with improved community
resilience against climate-induced multi-hazard natural disasters Baseline
(2020):  Target (2025): 780 direct beneficiaries (50% female) Source: UNDP,
annually Output  Space widened for dialogue and participation that strengthens
civil society, community resilience, social cohesion and implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda • Indicator  Number of initiatives to support
direct people-to-people contacts, liaison activities (deliveries of 18
DP/DCP/GEO/ medication and/or other essential goods) and to enhance enabling
environment for dialogue and trust within and across divided communities
Baseline (2020): 121 Target (2025): 221 Source: UNDP, annually • Indicator
Number of people who benefit from peacebuilding initiatives that ensure enhanced
confidence within and between divided communities Baseline (2020): 26,430, 49%
women Target (2025): 42,000 (50% women) Source: UNDP, annually 19